The Project Gutenberg eBook of Playing with Fire, by James Grant

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Playing with Fire
       A Story of the Soudan War

Author: James Grant

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65773]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLAYING WITH FIRE ***






  PLAYING WITH FIRE

  _A STORY OF THE SOUDAN WAR_



  BY

  JAMES GRANT

  AUTHOR OF
  'THE ROMANCE OF WAR,' 'DULCIE CARLYON,' 'ROYAL
  HIGHLANDERS,' ETC.



  LONDON
  GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, LIMITED
  BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
  MANCHESTER AND NEW YORK

  1887





  JAMES GRANT'S NOVELS.

  The Romance of War
  The Aide-de-Camp
  The Scottish Cavalier
  Bothwell
  Jane Seton; or, The Queen's Advocate
  Philip Rollo
  The Black Watch
  Mary of Lorraine
  Oliver Ellis; or, The Fusileers
  Lucy Arden; or, Hollywood Hall
  Frank Hilton; or, The Queen's Own
  The Yellow Frigate
  Harry Ogilvie; or, The Black Dragoons
  Arthur Blane
  Laura Everingham; or, The Highlanders of Glenora
  The Captain of the Guard
  Letty Hyde's Lovers
  Cavaliers of Fortune
  Second to None
  The Constable of France
  The Phantom Regiment
  The King's Own Borderers
  The White Cockade
  First Love and Last Love
  Dick Rodney
  The Girl he Married
  Lady Wedderburn's Wish
  Jack Manly
  Only an Ensign
  Adventures of Rob Roy
  Under the Red Dragon
  The Queen's Cadet
  Shall I Win Her?
  Fairer than a Fairy
  One of the Six Hundred
  Morley Ashton
  Did She Love Him?
  The Ross-Shire Buffs
  Six Years Ago
  Vere of Ours
  The Lord Hermitage
  The Royal Regiment
  Duke of Albany's Own Highlanders
  The Cameronians
  The Scots Brigade
  Violet Jermyn
  Miss Cheyne of Essilmont
  Jack Chaloner
  The Royal Highlanders
  Colville of the Guards
  Dulcie Carlyon
  Playing with Fire
  Derval Hampton
  Love's Labour Won




  CONTENTS.

  CHAPTER

  I. MERLWOOD
  II. HESTER MAULE
  III. KASHGATE--A RETROSPECT
  IV. PLAYING WITH FIRE
  V. THE COUSINS
  VI. ANNOT DRUMMOND
  VII. 'IS SHE NOT PASSING FAIR?'
  VIII. 'IT WAS NO DREAM'
  IX. THE OLD LOVE AND THE NEW
  X. ROLAND'S HOME-COMING
  XI. A COLD RECEPTION
  XII. MAUDE
  XIII. ROLAND'S VEXATION
  XIV. MAUDE'S SECRET
  XV. MR. HAWKEY SHARPE SEEKS COUNSEL
  XVI. FOOL'S PARADISE
  XVII. AT EARLSHAUGH
  XVIII. 'MY LOVE SHE'S BUT A LASSIE YET'
  XIX. HESTER RECEIVES A PROPOSAL
  XX. MR. SHARPE MAKES A MISTAKE
  XXI. MALCOLM SKENE
  XXII. A FATAL SHOT
  XXIII. THE CITY OF THE CALIPHS--OCTOBER IN THE LAND OF THE PHARAOHS!
  XXIV. JACK ELLIOT'S PERIL
  XXV. THE WILL
  XXVI. MOLOCH
  XXVII. ANNOT'S MISGIVINGS
  XXVIII. THE FIRST OF OCTOBER
  XXIX. ALARM AND ANXIETY
  XXX. THE KELPIE'S CLEUGH
  XXXI. 'ALL OVER NOW!'
  XXXII. PELION ON OSSA
  XXXIII. A TANGLED SKEIN
  XXXIV. THE PRESENTIMENT
  XXXV. LOST IN THE DESERT
  XXXVI. ALONE!
  XXXVII. THE FIRST QUARREL
  XXXVIII. THE CRISIS
  XXXIX. TURNING THE TABLES
  XL. THE NEW POSITION
  XLI. THE CAPTIVE
  XLII. THE ZEREBA OF SHEIKH MOUSSA
  XLIII. A MARRIAGE
  XLIV. THE TROOPSHIP
  XLV. THE DEATH WRESTLE
  XLVI. MAUDE'S VISITOR
  XLVII. THE RESULT
  XLVIII. 'INFIRM OF PURPOSE!'
  XLIX. CHRISTMAS DAY IN CAMP AT KORTI
  L. THE START FOR KHARTOUM
  LI. THE MARCH IN THE DESERT
  LII. THE PRESENTIMENT FULFILLED
  LIII. A HOMEWARD GLANCE
  LIV. THE LONG-SUSPENDED SWORD
  LV. WITH GENERAL EARLE's COLUMN
  LVI. THE BATTLE OF KIRBEKAN
  LVII. THE SICK CONVOY
  LVIII. IN THE SHOUBRAH GARDENS
  LIX. CONCLUSION




PLAYING WITH FIRE.



CHAPTER I.

MERLWOOD.

''Pon my word, cousin, I think I should actually fall in love with
you, but that--that----'

'What?' asked the girl, with a curious smile.

'One so seldom falls in love with one they have known for a life
long.'

The girl sighed softly, and said, still smiling sweetly:

'Looking upon her as almost a sister, you mean, Roland.'

'Or almost as a brother, as the case may be.'

'Then how about Paul and Virginia?  They knew each other all their
lives, and yet loved each other tenderly.'

'Or desperately, rather, Hester; but that was in an old story book
greatly appreciated by our grandmothers.'

'Instead of talking nonsense here, I really think you should go home,
Roland,' said the girl, with a tone of pain and pique at his
nonchalant manner; 'home for a time, at least.'

'To Earlshaugh?'

'Yes.'

'Are you tired of me already, Hester?'

'Tired of you, Roland?--oh, no,' replied the girl softly, while
playing with the petals of a flower.

The speakers were Roland Lindsay, a young captain of the line, home
on leave from Egypt, and his cousin, Hester Maule, a handsome girl in
her eighteenth year; and the scene in which they figured was a shady,
green and well-wooded grassy bank that sloped down to the Esk, in
front of the pretty villa of Merlwood, where he swung lazily in a net
hammock between two beautiful laburnum-trees, smoking a cigar, while
she sat on the turf close by, with a fan of peacock feathers in her
slim and pretty hand, dispersing the midges that were swarming under
the trees in the hot sunshine of an August evening.

While the heedless fellow who swung there, enjoying his cigar and his
hammock, and the charm of the whole situation, twitted her with her
unconcern, Hester--we need not conceal the fact--loved him with a
love that now formed part of her daily existence; while he accorded
her in return the half-careless affection of a brother, or as yet
little more.

At his father's house of Earlshaugh, at his uncle's villa of
Merlwood, and elsewhere, till he had joined his regiment, they had
been brought up together, and together had shared all the pleasures
and amusements of childhood.  In the thick woods of Earlshaugh, and
along the sylvan banks of the Esk, in the glorious summer and autumn
days, it had been their delight to clamber into thick and leafy
bowers--vast and mysterious retreats to them--where, with the birds
around them, and the flowers, the ivy, and the ferns beneath their
feet, they wove fairy caps of rushes and conned their tasks, often
with cheek laid against cheek and ringlets intermingled; and in their
days of childhood Roland had often told her tales of what they would
do and where they would go when they became man and wife, and little
Hester wondered at the story he wove, as it seemed impossible that
they could ever be happier than they were then.  He always preferred
her as a companion and playmate to his only sister Maude, greatly to
the indignation of that young lady.

She had borne her part in many of Roland's boyish pastimes, even to
spinning tops and playing marbles, until the days came when they
cantered together on their sturdy little Shetlands through Melville
Woods and by the braes of Woodhouselee, or where Earlshaugh looked
down on the pastoral expanse near Leuchars and Balmullo, in the East
Neuk of Fife.

When the time came that Roland had inexorably to go forth into the
world and join his regiment, poor Hester Maule wept in secret as if
her heart would have burst; while he--with all a boy's ardour for his
red coat and the new and brilliant life before him--bade her farewell
with provoking equanimity and wonderful philosophy; and now that he
had come back, and she--in the dignity of her eighteen years--could
no longer aid him in birdnesting (if he thought of such a thing), or
holding a wicket for him, she had--during the few weeks he had been
at home--felt her girl's heart go back to the sweet old days and the
starting-point, which he seemed to have almost forgotten, or scarcely
referred to.

And yet, when she came along the grassy bank, and tossed her garden
hat aside on seating herself on the grass near him, there was
something in her bearing then which haunted him in after-years--a
shy, unconscious grace in all her movements, a flush on her soft
cheek, a bright expression in her clear and innocent eyes, brightened
apparently by the flickering shadows that fell between the leaves
upon her uncovered head, and flushed her white summer dress with
touches of bright colour; and looking at him archly, she began, as if
almost to herself, to sing a song she had been wont to sing long
ago--an old song to the older air of the 'Bonnie Briar Bush':

  'The visions of the buried past
    Come thronging, dearer far
  Than joys the present hour can give,
    Than present objects are----'


'Go on, Hester,' said Roland, as she paused.

'No,' said she with a little _moue_, 'you don't care for these old
memories now.'

'When soldiering, Hester, we have to keep our minds so much in the
present that, by Jove! a fellow has not much time for brooding over
the past.'

Hester made no reply, but cast down her lashes, and proceeded to roll
and unroll the ribbons of her hat round her slender fingers.

Roland Lindsay manipulated another cigar, lit it leisurely, and
relapsed into silence too.

He was a remarkably good-looking young fellow, and perhaps one who
knew himself to be so, having been somewhat spoiled by ladies
already.  Though not quite regular, his features were striking,
and--like his bearing--impressed those who did not know him well with
a high opinion of his strength of character, which was not great, we
must admit, in some respects; though his chin was well defined and
even square, as shown by his being closely shaven all save a
carefully trimmed dark moustache.

His grayish hazel eyes looked almost black at night, and were
expressive and keen yet soft.  In figure he was well set up--the
drill-sergeant had done that; and unmistakably he was a manly-looking
fellow in his twenty-seventh year, dressed in a plain yet
irreproachably-made tweed suit of light gray that well became his
dark and dusky complexion, with spotlessly white cuffs and tie, and a
tweed stalking-cap peaked before and behind.  He had an air of
well-bred nonchalance, of being perfectly at home; and now you have
him--Captain Roland Lindsay of Her Majesty's Infantry, with a face
and neck burned red and blistered by the fierce sun of Egypt and the
Soudan.

Merlwood, the house of Hester's father, which he was now favouring
with a protracted visit, is situated on the north bank of the Esk,
and was so named as being the favourite haunt of the blackbird, whose
voice was heard amid its thickets in the earliest spring, as that of
the throstle was heard not far off in the adjacent birks of
Mavis-wood on the opposite side of that river, which, from its source
in the hills of Peebles till it joins the sea at Musselburgh,
displays sylvan beauties of which no other stream in Scotland can
boast--the beauties of which Scott sang so skilfully in one of his
best ballads:

  'Sweet are the paths, O, passing sweet!
    By Esk's fair streams that run
  O'er airy steep, through copsewood deep,
    Impervious to the sun,

  'From that fair dome where suit is paid,
    By blast of bugle free,
  To Auchindinny's hazel shade,
    And haunted Woodhouselee,

  'Who knows not Melville's beechy grove
    And Roslin's rocky glen,
  Dalkeith, which all the virtues love,
    And classic Hawthornden?

Embosomed amid the beautiful scenery here, the handsome modern villa
of Merlwood, with its Swiss roof and plate-glass oriel windows half
smothered amid wild roses, clematis, and jasmine, crowned a bank
where the dreamy and ceaseless murmur of the Esk was ever heard; and
in the cosy if not stately rooms of which old Sir Harry Maule,
K.C.B., a retired Lieutenant-General, and the veteran of more than
one Indian war, had stored up the mementoes of his stirring past--the
tusky skulls, striped skins, and giant claws of more than one
man-eating tiger, trophies of his breechloader; and those of other
Indian conflicts at Lucknow, Jhansi, and elsewhere, in the shape of
buffalo shields, tulwars, inlaid Afghan juzails, battle axes, and
deadly khandjurs, with gorgeous trappings for horse and elephant.

And picturesque looked the home of the old soldier and his only
daughter Hester, as seen in the August sunshine, at that season when
autumn peeps stealthily through the openings made in thicket and
hedge, when the sweet may-buds are dead and gone, the feathered
grasses are cut down, but the ferns and the ivy yet cover all the
rocks of the Esk, and flowering creepers connect the trees; the blue
hare-bell still peeped out, and in waste places the ox-eye daisy and
the light scarlet poppy were lingering still, for August is a month
flushed with the last touches of summer, and though the latter was
past and gone, those warm tints which make the Scottish woods so
peculiarly lovely in autumn had not yet begun to mellow or temper the
varied greenery of the bosky valley of rocks and timber through which
the mountain Esk flows to the Firth of Forth.

To the eyes of Roland Lindsay, how still and green and cool it all
seemed, after the arid sands, the breathless atmosphere, and the
scorching heat of Southern Egypt!

'By Jove, there is no place like home!' thought he, and he tossed out
of his hammock _Punch_, the _Graphic_, and Clery's 'Minor Tactics,'
with which he had been killing time, till his fair cousin joined him;
and with his cigar alight, his stalking cap tilted forward over his
eyes, his hands behind his head, he swung to and fro in the full
enjoyment of lazy indolence.




CHAPTER II.

HESTER MAULE.

Though the life of Hester Maule at Merlwood was a somewhat secluded
one, as she had no mother to act as chaperone, it was not one of
inaction.  Her mornings were generally spent in charitable work among
poor people in the nearest village, visiting the old and sick,
sometimes in scolding and teaching the young, assisting the minister
in many ways with local charities, and often winding up the evening
by a brisk game of lawn-tennis with his young folks at the manse, and
now and then a ball or a carpet dance at some adjacent house, when
late hours never prevented her from being down from her room in the
morning, as gay as a mavis or merle, to pour out her father's coffee,
cut and air his paper, or attend to his hookah, the use of which the
old Anglo-Indian had not yet been able to relinquish.

Now the girl had become shy or dry in manner, piqued and silent
certainly, to her cousin; for, in mortifying contrast to her silent
thoughts, she was pondering over his off-hand speech with which the
preceding chapter opens; thus even he found it somewhat difficult to
carry on a one-sided conversation with the back of her averted head,
however handsome, with its large coil of dark and glossy hair turned
to him.

Roland liked and more than admired his graceful cousin, and now,
perhaps suspecting that his nonchalant manner was scarcely 'the
thing' and finding her silent, even frosty in manner, he said:

'Hester, will you listen to me now?'

'That depends upon what you have to say, Roland.'

'I never say anything wrong, so don't be cross, my dear little one.'

'He treats me as a child still!' she thought in anger, and said
sharply:

'Well?'

'Shall we go along the river bank and see the trout rising?'

'Why?'

'Well--it is certainly better than doing nothing.'

'But is useless,' said she coldly.

'Why?  It is now my turn to ask.'

'Because you know very well, or ought to know, that there are none to
be seen after June, and that the mills have ruined angling hereabout.'

'Let us look for ferns, then--there are forty different kinds, I
believe, in Roslin Glen.'

'Ferns--how can you be so childish, Roland!' exclaimed the girl with
growing pique, as she thought--'If he has aught to say of more
interest, surely he can say it here,' and she kept her eyes averted,
looking down the wooded glen through which the river brawled, with
her heart full of affection and love, which her cousin was singularly
slow to see; then furtively she looked at him once or twice, as he
lounged on his back, smoking and gazing upward at the patches of blue
sky seen through the interlaced branches of the overarching trees.

'Gentleman' was stamped on every feature and in every action of
Lindsay, and there was an easy and quiet deliberation in all he did
and said that indicated good breeding, and yet he had a bearing in
his figure and aspect in his dark face that would have become
Millais' 'Black Brunswicker.'

Hester Maule is difficult to describe; but if the reader will think
of the prettiest girl she or he ever saw, they have a general idea of
her attractions.

A proud and stately yet most graceful-looking girl, Hester had a
lissom figure a trifle over the middle height, hair of the richest
and deepest brown, dark violet-coloured and velvety-like eyes with
full lids, long lashes, and brows that were black; a dazzling
complexion, a beautiful smile when pleased, and hands and feet that
showed race and breeding beyond all doubt.

Roland was quite aware that Hester was no longer a child, but a girl
almost out of her teens, and one that looked older than her years.
He had seen her at intervals, and seen how she had grown up and
expanded into the handsome girl she had become--one of whom any
kinsman might be proud; and with all his seeming indifference and
doubt of his true emotions, it was evident now that propinquity might
do much; and times there were when he began to feel for her some of
that tender interest and admiration which generally form a sure
prelude to love.  Moreover, they were cousins, and 'there is no
denying that cousinship covers a multitude of things within its
kindly mantle.'

Hester was the only daughter of his maternal uncle, the old General,
whose services had won him a K.C.B.--an improvident and somewhat
impoverished man, who for years had been a kind of invalid from
ailments contracted after the great Indian Mutiny--chiefly from a
bullet lodged in his body at Jhansi, when he fought under the famous
Sir Hugh Rose--Lord Strathnairn in later years.

She was the one 'ewe lamb' of his flock, all of whom were lying by
their mother's side under the trees in the old kirkyard of Lasswade,
within sound of the murmuring Esk; and though the charm of Hester's
society had been one of the chief reasons that induced Roland Lindsay
to linger at Merlwood, as he had done for nearly a month past, he was
loth to adopt the idea now being involved therein.  Such is the
inconsistency of the male heart at times; and he, perhaps,
misconstrued, or attributed his emotion to compassion for her
apparently lonely life and somewhat dubious future--for Sir Henry's
life was precarious; and in this perilous and dubious state matters
were now, while Roland's leave of absence was running on.

Not that the latter was extremely limited.  To the uninitiated we may
mention that what is technically termed winter leave extends
generally from the 15th October to the 14th of the following March,
'when all officers are to be present with their respective regiments
and depôts;' but Roland had extended or more ample leave accorded him
than this, owing to the sufferings he had undergone from a wound and
fever when with the army of occupation in Egypt, a portion of which
his regiment formed--hence it was that August saw him at Merlwood.

And now we may briefly state how he was situated, and some of the
'features' on which his future 'hinged.'

During his absence with the army his father, the old fox-hunting
Laird of Earlshaugh, a widower, after the death of Roland's mother
had rashly married her companion, a handsome but artful woman, who,
at his death (caused by a fall in the hunting-field, after which she
had nursed him assiduously), was left by him, through his will, all
that he possessed in land, estate, and heritage, without control; but
never doubting--poor silly man--that she would do full justice in the
end to his only son and daughter, as a species of mother, monitress,
and guardian--a risk the eventualities of which he had not quite
foreseen, as we shall show in the time to come.

But so it was; his father, who, at one time, he thought, would hardly
have rested in his grave if the acres of Earlshaugh and the turrets
of the old mansion had gone out of the family, in which they had been
since Sir James Lindsay of Edzell and Glenesk fell by his royal
master's side at Flodden, had been weak enough to do this monstrous
piece of injustice, under the influence of an artful and designing
woman!

It was an injury so galling, so miserable, and--to Roland Lindsay--so
scarcely realizable, that he had been in no haste to return to his
ancestral home.

And hence, perhaps, he had lingered at Merlwood, where his uncle, Sir
Harry, who hated, defied, and utterly failed to understand anything
of the 'outs and ins' of law or lawyers, including wills and
bequests, etc., etc., fed his natural indignation by anathematizing
the artful Jezebel of a step-mother; and declaring that he never did
and never would believe in her; and adjusting himself as well as that
cursed 'Jhansi bullet' would allow him, while lounging back in his
long, low, and spacious Singapore chair, he would suck his hookah
viciously, and roundly assert, as a crowning iniquity, that he was
certain she had 'at least four annas to the rupee in her blood!'




CHAPTER III.

KASHGATE--A RETROSPECT.

It was pretty clear, on the whole, to Hester, that her cousin, Roland
Lindsay, thought but little of the past, and perhaps, as a general
rule, cared for it even less.  While she had been living on the
memory of these dear days, especially since this--his last return
home--he had allowed other events to obliterate it from his mind.

Let us take a little retrospect.

In contrast to the apparently languid and _blasé_ smoker, swinging in
his net hammock, enjoying the balmy evening breeze by the wooded Esk,
and dallying with a girl of more than ordinary loveliness, let us
imagine him in a dusty and blood-stained tunic, with a battered
tropical helmet, a beard unshaven for many a day, haggard in visage,
wild-eyed and full of soldierly enthusiasm, one of the leading actors
in a scene like the following, at the fatal and most disastrous
battle of Kashgate.

It was the evening of the 3rd November in an arid waste of the
Soudan--sand, sand everywhere--not a well to yield a drop of brackish
water, not a tree to give the slightest shade.  The heat was awful,
beyond all parallel and all European conception, well-nigh beyond
endurance, and the doomed soldiers of General Hicks--known as Hicks
Pasha--a veteran of the famous old Bombay Fusiliers who had served at
Magdala, and to whose staff Roland Lindsay, then a subaltern, was
attached, toiled on, over the dry and arid desert steppe that lies
between El Duem and El Obeid, in search of the troops of the
ubiquitous Mahdi--the gallant Hicks and his few British officers
training their loosely and hastily constituted Egyptian army to
operations in the field, even while advancing against one, said to be
three hundred thousand strong--doubtless an Oriental
exaggeration--but strong enough nevertheless, as the event proved, to
sweep their miserable soldiers off the face of the earth, in that
battle, the details of which will never be known till the Last Day,
as only one or two escaped.

Like Colonel Farquhar of the Guards, Majors Warren, Martin and other
British officers, Roland Lindsay, by his personal example, had done
all that in him lay to cheer the weak-limbed and faint-hearted
Egyptian soldiers, whose almost sable visages were now gaunt and
hollow, and whose white tunics and scarlet tarbooshes were tattered
and worn by their long and toilsome march through the terrible
country westward of the White Nile--a vast steppe covered with low
thorny trees, purple mimosa, gum bushes, and spiky grass, till the
sad, solemn, and desert waste was reached near Kashgate, where
all--save one or two--were to find their graves!

Mounted on a splendid Arab, whose rider he had slain in the battle of
the 29th of April, Roland Lindsay led one face of the hollow square
in which the troops marched, and in which formation they fought for
three days, with baggage, sick and wounded in the centre, Krupp and
Nordenfeldt guns in the angles, against a dark and surging human sea
of frantic Dervishes, wild Bedouins, and equally wild and savage
Mohammedans and Mulattoes, shrieking, yelling, armed with ponderous
swords and deadly spears that flashed like thousands of mirrors in
the sunshine.

The Dervishes came on, the foremost and most fearless, sent by the
Mahdi, Mahommed Achmet Shemseddin, who had declared that they must
vanquish all, as they had the aid of Heaven, of the Prophet and his
legions of unseen angels, as at the battle of Bedr, when he conquered
the Koreish.

Wild and desperate was the prolonged fighting, the Egyptians knowing
that no mercy would be accorded to them, and fearful was the
slaughter, till the sand was soaked with blood--till the worn-out
square was utterly broken, its living walls dashed to pieces, and
hurled against each other under the feet of the victorious Mahdists.

In vain did young Lindsay, like other Britons who followed Hicks,
endeavour to make some of their men front about; calling on them,
sword and revolver in hand, as they flung themselves on the sand now
in despair, face downwards, and perished miserably under sword and
spear, or fled in abject and uncontrollable terror; but in the end he
found himself abandoned, and had to hack his way out of the press
through a forest of weapons till he reached the side of General
Hicks, who was making a last and desperate charge at the head of his
staff alone!

Side by side, with a ringing and defiant cheer, these few Britons
galloped against the living flood that was led by a sheikh in
brilliant floating robes.

'He is the Mahdi--he is the Mahdi!' cried Lindsay, and such Hicks and
all who followed him supposed that sheikh, but in mistake, to be.

He was splendidly mounted, and in addition to his Mahdi surcoat and
floating robes wore a glittering Dharfour helmet, with a tippet of
chain-mail and a long shirt of the same defensive material.  Through
this the sword of Hicks gave him a deadly cut in the arm, and his
sword-hand dropped, but with the other he contrived to hurl a club,
which unhorsed the General, who was then slain; but the mailed
warrior, who looked like a Crusader of the twelfth century, was hewn
down by Roland through helmet and head to the chin, and just as he
fell above Hicks all the staff perished then on foot, their horses
being speared or hamstrung--all gallant and resolute soldiers,
Fraser, Farquhar, Brodie, Walker, and others--fighting back to back
or in a desperate circle.

One moment Roland saw the last of them, erect in all the pride and
strength of manhood, inspired by courage and despair--his cheeks
flushed, his eyes flashing, while handling his sword with all the
conscious pride of race and skill; and the next he lay stretched and
bleeding on the heap beside him, with the pallor in his face of one
who would never rise again.

In that _mêlée_ no less than three Emirs of the False Prophet fell
under the sword of Lindsay, who cut his way out and escaped alone;
and spattered with blood from the slain, as well as from two
sword-wounds in his own body, spurred rearward his horse, which had
many a gash and stab, but carried him clear out of the field and
onward till darkness fell, and he found himself alone--alone in the
desert.  There the whitening skeleton of more than one camel--the
relic of a caravan--lay; and there the huge Egyptian vultures
('Pharaoh's chickens,' as they are called), with their fierce beaks,
great eyes, and ample wings, were floating overhead on their way to
the field, for the unburied slain attract these flocks from a
wonderful distance.

When his horse sank down, Lindsay remained beside it, helpless and
weary, awaiting the blood-red dawn of the Nubian sun.

As he lay there under the stars that glittered out of the blue sky
like points of steel, many a memory of the past, of vanished faces,
once familiar and still loved; of his home at Earlshaugh, with its
wealth of wood and hill; and recollections which had been growing
misty and indistinct came before him with many a scene and episode,
like dissolving views that melted each other, as he seemed to himself
to sink into sleep--the sleep that was born of fatigue, long
over-tension of the nerves, and loss of blood.

For weeks he was returned as one of the slain who had perished at
Kashgate; but Roland was hard to kill.  He had reached Khartoum--how
he scarcely knew--ere Gordon, the betrayed and abandoned by England,
had perished there; and eventually regained the headquarters of his
regiment, then with the army of occupation in Lower Egypt.

Of all this, and much more, with reference to her cousin had Hester
Maule read in the public prints; but little or nothing of his
adventures in the East could she glean from him, as he seemed very
diffident and loth to speak of himself, unlike her father, Sir Harry,
who was never weary of his reminiscences of the war in Central India,
particularly the siege and capture of Jhansi under Lord Strathnairn,
of gallant memory.

So the bearing of Roland Lindsay at the battle of Kashgate and
elsewhere had proved that he was worthy of the old historic line from
which he sprang; and that there was a latent fire, energy, and spirit
of the highest kind under his calm, easy, and pleasant exterior.




CHAPTER IV.

PLAYING WITH FIRE.

And now, a few days subsequently, while idling after dinner over
coffee and a cigar, with his pretty cousin and Sir Harry, in the
latter's study, a little room set apart by him for his own
delectation, where he could always find his tobacco jars, the Army
Lists, East Indian Registers, and so forth, ready at hand--a 'study'
hung round with whips and spurs, fishing and shooting gear, a few old
swords, and furnished with Singapore chairs, tiger skins, and a
couple of teapoys, or little tables, Roland Lindsay obtained a little
more insight into family matters that had transpired daring his
absence while soldiering against the False Prophet in the East.

Sir Harry was a tall and handsome man, nearer his seventieth than his
sixtieth year, with regular aquiline features, keen gray eyes, and
closely shaven, all save a heavy moustache, which was, like his hair,
silver white; and though somewhat feebler now by long Indian service
and wounds, he looked every inch, an aristocratic old soldier and
gently but decidedly he spoke to his nephew of troubles ahead, while
Hester's white hands were busy among her Berlin wools, and she
glanced ever and anon furtively, but with fond interest, at her young
kinsman, who apparently was provokingly unconscious thereof.

The old fox-hunting laird, his father, though a free liver, had never
been reckless or profligate; had never squandered or lost an acre of
Earlshaugh; never drank or gambled to excess, nor been duped by his
most boon companions; but on finding that he was getting too heavy
for the saddle, and that the world, after all, was proving 'flat,
stale, and unprofitable,' had latterly, for a couple of years before
his death, buried himself in the somewhat dull and lonely if stately
mansion of Earlshaugh, where he had for a second time, to the
astonishment of all his friends, those of the Hunt particularly,
betaken himself to matrimony, or been lured thereinto by his late
wife's attractive and, as Sir Harry phrased it, 'most strategic' and
enterprising companion, who had--as all the folks in the East Neuk
said--contrived to 'wind him round her little finger,' by discovering
and sedulously attending to and anticipating all his querulous wants
and wishes; and thus, when he died, it was found that he had left
her--as already stated--possessed of all he had in the world, to the
manifest detriment and danger of his only son and daughter; and,
worse still, it would seem that the widow was now in the hands of one
more artful than herself--said to be a relation--one Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe, into whose care and keeping she apparently confided
everything.

Roland's yearly allowance since he joined the army had not been
meddled with; but deeming himself justly the entire heir of
everything, it could scarcely be thought he would be content with
that alone now.

'A black look-out, uncle,' said he grimly; 'so, prior to my return to
Earlshaugh, to be forewarned is to be fore-armed.'

'Yes; but in this instance, my boy,' said Sir Harry, relinquishing
for a moment the amber mouthpiece of his hookah, 'you scarcely know
against what or against whom.'

'Nor can I, perhaps, until I see a lawyer on the subject.'

'Oh, d--n lawyers!  Keep them out of it, if possible.  The letters
S.S.C. after a man's name always make me shiver.'

'And who is this Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, who seems to have installed
himself at Earlshaugh?' asked Roland, after a brief pause.

'No one knows but your--your stepmother,' replied Sir Harry, with a
grimace, as he kicked a hassock from under his foot.  'No one but she
apparently; he seems a sharp fellow, in whom she trusts implicitly in
all regarding the estate.'

'Where did he come from?'

'God knows; but he seems to be what our American cousins deem the
acme of 'cuteness.'

'And that is----'

'A Yankee Jew attorney of English parentage,' replied Sir Harry, with
a kind of smile, in which his nephew did not join.

'Earlshaugh is a fine properly, as we all know, uncle; but it was
deuced hard for me, when I thought I had come into it, to find this
stepmother--a person I can barely remember acting as my mother's
amanuensis, factotum, and toady--constituted a species of guardian to
me--to me, a captain in my twenty-seventh year, and to be told that I
must for the time content me with my old allowance, as the pater had
been--she said--rather extravagant, and so forth.  I can't make it
out.'

'Neither can I, nor any other fellow,' said the old General testily.
'I only know that your father made a very idiotic will, leaving all
to that woman.'

'If he actually did so,' said Roland.

'No doubt about it--I heard it read.'

'But you are a little deaf, dear uncle.'

'D--n it, don't say that, Roland--I am fit for service yet!'

'Well, she has not interfered with my allowance as yet.'

'Allowance!' exclaimed Sir Harry, smiting the table with his hand;
'why the devil should you be restricted to one at all?'

'If--I am very ignorant in law, uncle--but if under this will she has
the life-rent----'

'More than that, I tell you.'

'I can scarcely believe it; and she has not meddled with the
allowance of dear little Maude.'

'She may cut off your sister's income and yours too at any moment,
Roland!'

'Well, I suppose if the worst comes to the worst,' said the latter,
with a kind of bitter laugh, while still hoping against hope, 'I
shall have to send in my papers and volunteer as a trooper for one of
these Cape corps in Bechuanaland or the Transvaal.'

'Oh, Roland, don't think of such things,' said Hester, as with
tenderness in her eyes she looked up at him for a moment, and then
resumed her work.

'Have you seen this stepmother of mine lately?' he asked.

'No--but she has invited me to Earlshaugh next month, not knowing,
perhaps, that you would spend the first month of your leave--'

'With his old uncle,' said Sir Harry, as his eyes kindled, and he
patted Roland's shoulder, adding, 'a good lad--a good lad--my own
sister's son!'

Uncle and nephew had much in common between them, even 'shop,' as
they phrased it; and the regard they had for each other was mutual
and keen.

'She writes to me seldom,' said Hester, 'for, of course, our tastes
and ideas are somewhat apart; but, as papa says, when he sees her
stiff note-paper, with the sham gentility of its gilt and crimson
monogram, and strong fragrance of Essbouquet, he feels sure that,
with all her manners, airs, and so forth, she cannot be a lady,
though many a lady's companion, as she was to your mother, unhappily
is.'

Roland remained silent, sucking his cheroot viciously.

'Yes,' observed his uncle, 'her very notes in their pomposity speak
of self-assertion.'

'In going--unwillingly as I shall--to Earlshaugh, I don't know how
the deuce I may get on with such an incubus,' said Roland
thoughtfully; and now thoughts of the cold welcome that awaited him
by the hearth that had been his father's, and their forefathers' for
generations past, made him naturally think and feel more warmly and
kindly of those with whom he was now, and more disposed to cling to
the loving old kinsman who eyed him so affectionately, and the sweet,
gentle cousin, every motion of whose white hands and handsome head
was full of grace; and thus, more tenderly than ever was his wont, he
looked upon her and addressed her, softly touching her hands, as he
affected to sort, but rather disarranged, the wool in her
work-basket; and, though the days were rather past now when he
regarded with interest and admiration every pretty girl as the
probable wife of his future, and he had not thought of Hester in that
sense at all, she was not without a subtle interest for him that he
could scarcely define.

'Give me some music, Hester--by Jove!  I am getting quite into the
blues; there is a piano in the next room,' said Roland, throwing
aside his cigar and leading her away; 'a song if you will, cousin,'
he added, opening the instrument and adjusting the stool, on which
she seated herself.

'What song, Roland?'

'Any--well, the old, old one of which you sang a verse to me the
other evening in the lawn.'

'Do you really wish it?' she asked, looking round at him with
half-drooped lashes, and an earnest expression in her dark, starry
eyes.

'I do, indeed, Hester--for "Auld Langsyne."'  So she at once gave her
whole skill and power to the Jacobite air and the simple, old song
which ran thus

  'The visions of the buried past
    Come thronging, dearer far
  Than joys the present hour can give,
    Than present objects are.
  I love to dwell among their shades,
    That open to my view;
  The dreams of perished men, and years,
    And bygone glory, too.

  'For though such retrospect is sad,
    It is a sadness sweet,
  The forms of those whom we revere,
    In memory to meet.
  Since nothing in this changing world
    Is constant but decay;
  And early flowers but bloom the first,
    To pass the first away!'


As the little song closed, the girl's voice, full as she was of her
own thoughts, became exquisitely sweet, even sad.

'Hester, thank you, dear,' said Roland, laying a hand on her soft
shoulder, with a sudden gush of unusual tenderness.  'The early
flowers that bloomed so sweetly with us have not yet passed away,
surely, Hester?'

'I hope not, Roland,' she replied, in a low voice.

'And I, too, hope not,' said he, stooping, and careless of the eyes
of Sir Harry, who had been drumming time to the air on a teapoy, he
pressed his lips to the straight white division between her close and
rich dark hair.

As he did so he felt her thrill beneath the touch of his lips, and
though his nonchalant air of indifference was gone just then he said
nothing more, but he thought:

'Is not this playing with fire?'




CHAPTER V.

THE COUSINS.

Some days passed on after the little episode at the piano, and the
intercourse between the cousins, if tender and alluring, was still
somewhat strange, undecided, and doubtful--save in the recesses of
Hester's heart.

Rambling together, as in days past, among the familiar and beautiful
sylvan scenery around Merlwood, times there certainly were, when eye
met eye with an expression that told its own story, and each seemed
to feel that their silence covered a deeper feeling than words could
express, and that though the latter were not forthcoming as yet,
their hearts and lives might soon be filled by a great joy, on the
part of the untutored girl especially.

At others, Roland, though not quite past seven-and-twenty, had, of
course, seen too much of the world and of life, in and out of
garrison, to be a hot-headed and reckless lover, or to rush into a
position which left him no safe or honourable line of retreat.

His passions were strong, but tempered by experience and quite under
his control; and he was inclined to be somewhat of a casuist.

'Was this brilliant and attractive companion,' he sometimes asked
himself, 'the same little girl who had been his playmate in the past,
who had so often faded out of his boyish existence amid other scenes
and places?  And now did she really care for him in _that_ way after
all?'

His manner was kind and affectionate to her, but playful, and while
lacking pointed tenderness, there was--she thought--something forced
about it at times.

When this suspicion occurred, her pride took the alarm.  Could it be
that she had insensibly allowed her heart to slip out of her own
keeping into that of one from whom no genuine word of love had come
to her?  Then the fear of this would sting Hester to the soul, and
make her at times--even after the _[oe]illades_ and eloquent silences
referred to--cold and reserved; and old Sir Harry, who, for many
reasons, monetary and otherwise, apart from a sincere and fatherly
regard for his only nephew, would have been rejoiced to have him as a
son-in-law, would mutter to himself:

'Do they know their own minds, these two young fools?'

He often thought sadly and seriously of Hester's future, for he had
been an improvident man; his funds and his pensions passed away with
himself; thus it was with very unalloyed delight that he watched the
pair together again as in the days of their childhood, and he wove
many a castle in the air; but they all assumed the form of a certain
turreted mansion in the East Neuk of Fife.  Then he would add to
Hester's annoyance by saying to her in a caressing and blundering way:

'He will love you very dearly, as he ought to do, some day, my pet;
and if you don't love him just now, you also will in time.  Your poor
mother would have liked it--Roland was ever her favourite.'

'Please not to say these things, papa,' implored Hester, though they
were alone, and she caressed his old white head, for Sir Harry seldom
or never spoke of her mother, whose death occurred some twelve years
before, without an emotion which he could not conceal, for he was
gentle and loving by nature.

'Bother the fellow!' said Sir Harry testily, ashamed that his voice
had broken and his eyes grown full; 'he should know his own heart by
this time.'

'I would rather, papa, you did not say such things.'

'Well--I can't help thinking of them, and you have no one to confide
in, Pet Hester, but me,' he added, drawing her head down on his
breast.

'If it will make you any happier, dear papa,' said Hester in a very
low voice, 'I will promise to do as you wish, if Roland asks me to
love him, which he has not done yet.  Anyway, it does not matter,'
she added, a little irrelevantly; 'I care for no one else.'

'Not even for Malcolm of Dunnimarle?' he asked laughingly.

'No, papa--not even for Malcolm Skene.'

'He admires you immensely, Hester, but then Roland seems to me just
the sort of fellow to advise and protect--to be good to a
girl--strong and brave, kind and tender.'

'Oh, hush, papa,' said Hester, ready to sink with confusion and
annoyance; 'here he comes,' she added, as Roland came lounging
through an open French window into the dining-room.

'What about Skene of Dunnimarle, uncle--surely I heard his name?' he
asked, adding to Hester's emotion of confusion, though he failed to
notice it.  'May I finish my cigar here, Hester?'

'Oh, please do--I rather like it,' she replied hastily.

'I have asked Skene for the shooting next month at Earlshaugh--to
knock over a few birds.'

'That will be pleasant for Hester; he is rather an admirer of hers,'
said Sir Harry.

'I don't know that he is,' said Hester; 'and if you talk that way, I
shall not go to Earlshaugh this summer at all, papa.'

'After your promise to me that you will do so?' asked Roland.

'Yes, even after my promise to you,' she replied, as she left the
room.

'I'll tell you a strange story of Malcolm's father when we were
together in Central India,' said Sir Harry, to change the subject.
'It happened at Jhansi--you never heard it, I suppose?'

'Not that I know of,' replied Roland, who was already weary of the
Indian reminiscences that Sir Harry contrived to drag into
conversation whenever he could.

'Well, it was a strange affair--very much out of the common, and
happened in this way.  Duncan Skene was Captain of our
Grenadiers--ah, we _had_ Grenadiers then, before the muddlers of
later years came!--and a handsomer fellow than Duncan never wore a
pair of epaulettes.  A year before we stormed Jhansi from the
Pandies, we were in quarters there, and all was as quiet at Allahabad
as it is here in the valley of the Esk.  We did not occupy the city
or the Star Fort, but we had lines outside the former then, and one
night Duncan, when pretty well primed, it was thought, after leaving
the mess bungalow, betook him towards his own, which stood in rather
a remote part of the cantonment.  All seemed dark and quiet, and the
_ghurries_ at the posts had announced the hour of two in the morning,
when Duncan came unexpectedly upon a large and well-lighted tent,
within which he saw six or seven fellows of ours--old faces that he
knew, but had not seen for some time--all carousing and drinking
round the table; he entered, and was at once made welcome by them all.

'Now, Duncan must have been pretty well primed indeed not to have
been sobered and chilled by what he saw; he could scarcely believe
his eyes or his own identity, and thought that for the past year he
must have been in a dream; for there he was met with outstretched
hands and hearty greetings by many of ours who he thought were gone
to their last homes.  There was Jack Atherly, second to none in the
hunting-field, whom he had seen knocked over by a matchlock ball in a
rascally hill fight; and there, too, was Charley Thorold, once our
pattern sub and pattern dancing man, who he thought had fallen the
same day at the head of the Light Company; there, too, were Maxwell
and Seton, our best strokes at billiards, whom he had seen--or
thought he had seen--die of jungle fever in Nepaul; and Hawthorn and
Bob Stuart, for whom he had backed many a bill, and who had been
assassinated by Dacoits; but now seeming all well and jolly, hale and
hearty, though a trifle pale, after all they had undergone.  It was a
marvellous--a bewildering meeting; but he felt no emotion either of
fear or surprise--as it is said that in dreams we seldom feel the
latter, though some of his hosts in figure did at times look a little
vaporous and indistinct.

'He was forced to sit down and drink with them, which he did, while
old regimental jokes were uttered and stories told till the tent
seemed to whirl round on its pole, the pegs all in pursuit of each
other; and then Duncan thought he must be off, as he was detailed for
guard at dawn.  But ere he quitted them, they all made him promise
that he was to rejoin them at the same place that day twelvemonth, a
long invitation, at which he laughed heartily, but to which he
acceded, promising faithfully to do so; then he reeled away, and
remembered no more till he was found fast asleep under the hedge of
his compound by the patrol about morning gun-fire.

'Duncan's dream, or late entertainment, recurred vividly to him in
all its details; he could point to the exact spot where the tent had
stood, but not a trace of it was to be found in any way, and no more
was thought about the matter by the few in whom he confided till that
time twelvemonth, when we found ourselves before Jhansi, with the
army sent under Lord Strathnairn to avenge the awful slaughter and
butchery there of the officers of the 12th Native Infantry by the
mutineers, from whom we took the place by storm; and in the conflict,
at the very hour of the morning in which Duncan Skene had had that
weird meeting and given that terrible promise, and on the very spot
where the supposed tent stood, he was killed by a cannon shot; and
just about the same time I received the infernal bullet which is
lodged in me still.

'That is a story beyond the common, Roland, for Skene of ours was a
fellow above all superstition, and wild though his dream--if a dream
it was--he was wont to relate it in a jocular way to more than
one--myself among the number.'

Was it the case that the mention of young Skene as a new
admirer--perhaps more than an admirer--of Hester had acted as a
species of fillip to Roland?  It almost seemed so, for after that
there was more tenderness if possible in his manner to her, and he
did not fail to remark that he saw music and books lying about,
presented to Hester by the gentleman in question; and her father
muttered to himself with growing satisfaction, for he loved Roland
well:

'Now they are all day together, just as they used to be; and see, he
is actually carrying her watering pan for the rosebuds.  Well,
Roland, that is better fun, I suppose, than carrying the lines of
Tel-el-Kebir!'  And the old gentleman laughed at his own conceit till
he felt his Jhansi bullet cause an aching where it lodged.  This
companionship filled the heart of the girl with supreme happiness,
and more than once she recalled the words of a writer who says of
such times: 'I think there are days when one's whole past life seems
stirred within one, and there come to the surface unlooked-for
visions and pictures, with gleams from the depths below.  Are they of
memory or of hope?  Or is it possible that those two words mean one
thing only, and are one at last when our lives are rounded and
complete?'

One evening, after being absent in the city, Roland suddenly, when he
and Hester were alone, opened a handsome morocco case wherein
reposed, in their dark-blue satin bed, a necklace of brilliant
cairngorms set in gold with a beautiful pendant composed of a single
Oriental amethyst encircled by the purest of pearls.

'A little gift for you, Hester,' said he; 'I am soon going to
Earlshaugh, and I hope to see you wear these there,' added he,
clasping the necklace round her slender throat.

'Oh, Roland!' exclaimed Hester in a breathless voice, while her
colour changed, 'can I accept such a gift?'

'From me--your cousin--Hester?' he asked softly but reproachfully,
and paused.  Beyond the gift he gave no distinct sign as yet, and it
flashed on Hester's mind that with the jewels there was no ring.
Could that be an omission?  Scarcely.

Then, seized by a sudden impulse, he abruptly, yet softly and
caressingly, drew her towards him and kissed her more than once.  He
had often saluted her before at meeting and parting, but always in a
cousinly way; but this seemed very different now.

Breathless, dazed apparently, the trembling girl pushed him from her,
and he gazed at her with some surprise as she said:

'Why did you do that, Roland?  It is cruel--unkind of you,' she
added, with trembling fingers essaying, but in vain, to unclasp the
necklet.

'Cruel and unkind--between us, Hester?'

'Yes,' she said, blushing deeply, and then growing very pale.

'I forgot myself for a moment, dearest Hester, in my fondness of you.'

She was trembling very much now, and as he took her hands caressingly
within his own, her eyes grew full of tears.

'Hester, you know--you know well,' he began, with a voice that
indicated deep emotion.

'Know what, Roland?' said she, trying to withdraw her hands.

'That I love you,' he was about to say, and would no doubt have said,
but that Sir Harry most inopportunely came limping heavily in, so
Roland was compelled to pause.  The few words that might have changed
all the story we have to tell were left unuttered, and next moment
Hester was gone.

'He does love me!' she thought in the solitude of her own room; 'love
me as I love him, and wish to be loved!'

Long she pondered over the episode and gazed on his gift ere she
retired to rest that night.  She hoped in time to bind him to her
more closely, for she thought he was a man who would love once in a
lifetime with all the strength of a great and noble nature.

Sweetly and brightly the girl smiled at her own reflection in the
mirror as with deft fingers she coiled up her rich brown hair for the
night; while slowly but surely she felt herself, with a new and
joyous thrill, to be turning her back upon the past, yet a happy and
an innocent past it had been, and that she was standing on the
threshold of a new and brighter world of dreams.

At last she slept.

Roland Lindsay had been on the point of declaring his love, but
something--was it Fatality?--withheld him; then the interruption
came, and the golden moment passed!

Would it ever come again?

But a change was at hand, which neither he nor Hester could foresee.




CHAPTER VI.

ANNOT DRUMMOND.

Next morning when Hester, in the most becoming of matutinal costumes,
pale rose colour, which so suited her dark hair and complexion, was
presiding over the breakfast table, and Sir Harry was about to dip
into his newspapers, selecting a letter from a few that lay beside
her plate, she said:

'Papa, I have a little surprise for you--a letter from Annot
Drummond, my cousin; she comes here to-night _en route_ to
Earlshaugh, invited by Maud, your sister,' she added to Roland; 'by
this time she will be leaving London at Euston.'

'"London, that maelstrom of mud and mannikins," as it has perhaps
been unjustly stigmatized by George Gilfillan,' said Sir Harry,
laughing, 'and she is to be here to-night--that is sudden.'

'But Annot was always a creature of impulse, papa!'

'So some think,' said her father; 'but to me her impulses always
seemed to come by fits and starts.  However, I shall be delighted to
see the dear child.'

'The "dear child" is now nearly eighteen, papa.'

'Heavens--how time runs on!--eighteen--yes.'

'And she and I are to go to Earlshaugh together in October--that is
if you can spare me, papa,' added Hester, colouring, and keeping the
silver urn between herself and Roland.

'Excellent; I shall make up a little party for the covert shooting,
to entertain Skene of Dunnimarle, Jack Elliot of ours, and one or two
more, if I can,' said the latter.  'I have been so long away from
Earlshaugh; but doubtless dear little Maud and the--the
stepmother----'

Sir Harry's brow clouded at the name, and Roland paused.

'You did not see Annot when in London?' said Hester.

'No--I had no time--she lived in a part of South Belgravia, rather
out of my wanderings,' replied Roland.

'She is a very attractive girl, gentlemen think.'

'Ah,' was the brief response of Roland, intent more on his breakfast
than the attractions of Annot Drummond, who was the only child of Sir
Harry's favourite sister, a widow, whose slender circumstances
compelled her to reside in a small and dull old-fashioned house of
the last century in that locality which lies on the borderland of
fashionable London, where the narrow windows, the doorways with huge
knockers, quaint half-circular fanlights, and link extinguishers in
the railings, tell of the days when George III. was King.

'She complains, Roland, that you did not call on her, in passing
through London.  Poor Annot,' said Hester.

'Our, or rather your, little Cockney cousin, who no doubt loves her
love with an A, because he is 'andsome,' laughed Roland.

'How can you mock Annot?' said Hester; 'she is a very accomplished
girl--and lovely too--at least all men say so.'

'And you, cousin Hester?'

'I quite agree with them.'  Hester was a sincere admirer of beauty,
and--perhaps owing to her own great attractions--was alike noble and
frank in admitting those of others.  'Her photo is in the album on
that side table.'

Roland was not interested enough in the matter even to examine it.

'You will be sure to admire her,' added Hester with an arch and even
loving smile as she thought of last night and the jewel that had been
clasped about her neck.

'Admire her--perhaps; but nothing more, I am sure,' replied Roland,
while Hester's colour deepened, and her smile brightened, though her
long lashes drooped.  He gave her covertly one of his fond glances,
which to the girl's loving eyes seemed to spread a glory over his
dark face, and a close hand-clasp followed, unseen by Sir Harry, who
was already absorbed in the news from Egypt; but coyly and shyly--she
could scarcely have told why--all that day she gave him no
opportunity of recurring to the episode of the preceding evening, or
resuming the thread of that sweet story which her father had so
unwittingly interrupted.

Since that minute of time, and its intended and most probable
_finale_, what had been Roland Lindsay's secret thoughts?  They were
many; but through all and above all had been a home such as he could
make even of gloomy and embattled Earlshaugh, if brightened by
Hester's sweet face, her alluring eyes and smile; with its echoes
wakened by her happy ringing voice, free from every note of care as
those of the merles in the wood around her father's house.

But withal came emotions of doubt and anger, as he thought of his
father's will, his own supposed false position thereby, and how the
future would develop itself.

Though old, and being so, he might be disposed to take gloomy views
of these doubts, that cheery veteran Sir Harry saw little or nothing
of them, and had but one thought while he limped along the river's
bank, enjoying his cheroot under the shady and overarching trees that
cast their shadows on the brawling Esk, that his nephew Roland was
the one man in all the world with whom he could fearlessly trust the
happiness of his daughter; and lovingly and fondly, with most
pardonable selfishness, the old man pondered over this; and thus it
was that the hopeful thoughts referred to in the preceding chapter
were ever recurring to him and wreathing his wrinkled face with
smiles, especially after he had seen the beautiful necklet, which
Hester had duly shown him, clasped round her snowy throat.  He loved
to see them together, and to hear them singing together at the piano
or in the garden, as if their hearts were like those of the merle and
mavis, so blithe, content, and happy they seemed, as when they were
boy and girl in the pleasant past time, when she wore short frocks
and little aprons, the pockets of which were always full of Roland's
boyish presents--sometimes the plunder of neighbours' fruit trees.
While to Roland the revived memory or vision of a bright little girl
with a tangled mass of curls, who was often petulant, and then would
confess her tiny faults as she sobbed on his shoulder, till absolved
by a kiss, was ever before him; and now they could linger, while
'dropping at times into that utterly restful silence which only those
can enjoy who understand each other well; and perhaps, indeed, only
those who love each other dearly.'

But this day was an active one with Hester.  She chose rooms for her
coming cousin, relinquishing for a time those slippers of dark blue
embroidery on buff leather with which she was busy for Roland.  Vases
of fresh flowers, selected and sorted with loving hands, were placed
in all available points to decorate the sleeping and dressing rooms
of Annot Drummond; draped back, the laced curtains of the windows
displayed the lovely valley of the Esk, up which the river, as it
flowed eastward, softly murmured; Kevock-bank and the wooded Kirkbrae
on the north; the slope of Polton on the south; Lasswade, with its
quaint bridge, in the middle distance, and Eldin woods beyond--a
sweet and sylvan view on which Hester was never weary of gazing.

Thus with her passed most of the day; how it was spent she scarcely
knew; then evening came, and she and Sir Harry drove into town to
meet their expected visitor; and Roland never knew how much he missed
her till he was left to his own thoughts--to the inevitable cheroot,
and after despatching his letters to Malcolm Skene, to Jack Elliot
'of ours,' and others, to vary his time between lounging in the
hammock between the shady trees and tossing pebbles into the Esk.

At last, after the shadows had deepened in the glen and dusk had
completely closed in, the sound of carriage wheels, with the opening
and banging to of doors, announced the arrival of Annot Drummond,
accompanied by her uncle and cousin; and Roland assisted them to
alight.  For a moment the tightly gloved and childlike hand of Miss
Drummond rested in his, and her eyes, the precise colour of which he
could not determine, but which seemed light and sparkling, met his
own with an expression of confidence and inquiry.  He had simply a
vague idea of sunny eyes and waving golden hair.  The rest was
undiscoverable.

'Roland, I suppose,' she exclaimed, laughing, adding, 'I beg your
pardon, Captain Lindsay--but I have heard so much of you from dearest
Hester.'

'Roland he is, my dear girl, and now welcome to Merlwood--welcome for
your mother's sake and your own!' exclaimed Sir Harry, as he turned
to give some orders about the luggage, and Annot, accompanied by
Hester, who towered above her by a head, tripped indoors, with a nod
and a smile to the old housekeeper and other servants, all of whom
she knew.  She seemed, indeed, a bright, fairy and airy-like little
creature, in the most becoming of travelling costumes and most
piquant of hats.

'She seems quite a child yet, by Jove!' said Sir Harry, looking after
the _petite_ creature, as she hurried to her room to change her
dress, and imbibe the inevitable cup of tea brought by the motherly
old housekeeper.

'What do you think of our Annot?' asked Hester, returning for a
moment.

'That she has a wonderfully fair skin,' replied Roland slowly.

'All the Drummond women have that--it runs in the clan.  But her
eyes--are they not beautiful?'

'I cannot say.'

'Did you not see them?'

'No, Hester.'

'Why?'

'She scarcely looked at me.'

'They are the loveliest hazel!' exclaimed Hester.

'Hazel--rather green, I think; but you know, I prefer eyes of violet
blue or gray to all others, Hester.'

She laughed, as she knew her own were the eyes referred to; but now
the gong--a trophy of Sir Harry's from Jhansi--sounded, and Annot
came hurrying downstairs, and clasped one of Hester's arms within her
own so caressingly, with her white fingers interlaced.

To Roland now, at second sight, she looked wonderfully _petite_ and
gentle, pure and fair--'fair as a snow-flake and nearly just as
fragile,' Sir Harry once said, and she clung lovingly and confidingly
to Hester, but it seemed as if, of necessity, Annot must always be
clinging to someone or something.




CHAPTER VII.

'IS SHE NOT PASSING FAIR?'

When she took her seat at table to partake of a meal which was
something between a late dinner and an early supper, Roland saw how
exquisitely fair Annot Drummond was, as with a pretty air of
childishness she clung to Hester--an air that became her _petite_
figure and _mignonne_ face, but not her years, as she was some months
older than her cousin, who with her dark hair and eyes he thought
looked almost brown beside this flaxen fairy, that seemed to realize
the comment of old Cambden, who says--'The women of the family of
Drummond, for charming beauty and complexion, are beyond all others,
and in so much that they have been most delighted in by kings.'

She had, however, greenish hazel eyes--greenish they were decidedly,
yet lovely and sparkling, shaded by brown lashes and eyebrows, with
golden hair, wonderful in quantity and tint, that rippled and shone.
Her complexion was pure and pale, while her pouting lips seemed
absolute scarlet, rather than coral; and her eyes spoke as freely as
her tongue, lighting and brightening with her subject, whatever it
was.

Annot's was indeed a tiny face; at times a laughing, a loving and
petulant face, and puzzling in so far that one knew not when it was
prettiest, or what expression became it most; yet Hester--a very
close observer--thought there was something cunning and watchful in
it at times now.

Seeing that Roland was closely observing the new arrival, she said:

'Would you ever imagine, cousin Roland, that Annot and I are just
about an age? she looks like fifteen, and I was eighteen my last
birthday.'

'Eighteen,' thought Roland Lindsay, toying with a few grapes; 'can it
be?--that golden-haired dolly--old enough to be the heroine of a
novel or a tragedy--old enough to be a wife and the mistress of a
household?  By Jove, it seems incredible.'

And as she prattled away of London, the Park and the Row, what plays
were 'on' at the different theatres, of new dresses, sights and
scenes, and so forth; of her journey down, a long and weary one of
some hundred miles, and the attention she received from various
gentlemen passengers, the bright chatterer, all smiles, animation,
and full of little tricks of manner, seemed indeed a contrast to the
taller, graver, dark-haired, and dark-eyed Hester, whose violet-blue
eye looked quite black by gaslight.

Though a niece of Sir Harry's, Annot Drummond was no cousin to Roland
Lindsay, yet she seemed quite inclined, erelong, to adopt the _rôle_
of being one; for he was quite handsome enough and interesting enough
in aspect and bearing to attract a girl like her, who instinctively
filled up her time with every chance-medley man she met, and knew
fully how to appreciate one whose prospects and positions were so
undoubtedly good; thus she repeatedly turned with her irresistible
smiles and _espièglerie_ to him, as if he were her sole, or certainly
her chief, audience.

Meanwhile old Sir Henry sat silently smoking his inevitable hookah,
eyeing her with loving looks, and tracing--or rather trying to
trace--a likeness between her and his favourite sister; and Hester,
who had of course seen her cousin often before, sat somewhat silent,
for then each girl was, perhaps unconsciously, trying to know, to
learn, and to grasp the nature of the other.

'Hester,' said Annot in a well-managed aside, 'I saw your friend
Skene of Dunnimarle in London, and he talked of you to me, and of no
one but you, which I thought scarcely fair.'

'Why?'

'One girl doesn't care to hear another's praises only for an hour
without end, I suppose.'

Hester looked annoyed, but Roland seemed to hear the remark as if he
heard it not, which was not the case, as Hester's name had been more
than once mentioned in conjunction with that of the young fellow in
question.

'I remember when Skene of ours at Sealkote----' Sir Harry was
beginning, when Hester contrived to cut the Indian reminiscence short.

Next morning Annot was in the garden betimes, natheless the fatigue
of her long railway journey; she seemed bright as a summer butterfly,
inhaling the fresh odour of the flowers, under the shady trees, amid
the rhododendrons of every brilliant tint, the roses and sub-tropical
plants that opened their rich petals to the August sunshine, and more
than all did she seem to enjoy the fresh, soft breeze that came up
the steep winding glen or ravine through which the Esk ran gurgling;
and ever and anon she glanced at her companion Roland, indulging in
that playful _gaîté de coeur_, which so often ends in disaster, for
she was a finished flirt to the tips of her dainty fingers; and he
was thinking, between the whiffs of his permitted cigar: What caused
his present emotion--this sudden attraction towards a girl whom he
had never seen before, and whose existence had been barely known to
him?  And now she was culling a dainty 'button-hole' for him, and
making him select a bouquet for the breast of her morning dress, a
most becoming robe of light blue cashmere with ribbons and lace of
white.

Could it be that mysterious influence of which he had heard often,
and yet of which he knew so little--a current of affinity so subtle
and penetrating, that none under its spell could resist it?  He was
not casuist enough to determine; but looked about for his cousin
Hester and muttered:

'Don't play the fool, Roland, my boy!'

Usually very diffident and reticent in talking about himself and his
affairs, even the gentle and winning Hester had failed, as she said,
to 'draw him out;' but now, Annot--the irrepressible Annot--led him
on to do so by manifesting, or affecting to manifest, a keen interest
in them, and thus lured him into flattering confidences to her alone
about his garrison life in England and the Mediterranean, or as much
as he cared to tell of it; his campaigns in Egypt; his escape from
the slaughter of Kashgate; his risks and wounds; his medals and
clasps; his regiment, comrades, and so forth, in all of which she
seemed suddenly to develop the deepest interest, though perhaps an
evil-minded person might have hinted that she had a deeper and truer
interest in Earlshaugh and its surroundings, of which he had no
conception as yet.

Hester quickly saw through these little manoeuvres, and at first she
laughed at them, thinking they were all the girl's way; that Roland
was the only young man at Merlwood; and so, by habit and nature, she
must talk to him, laugh with him, make _[oe]illades_ and dress for
him; and in dressing she was an adept, choosing always soft and
clinging materials of colours suited to her pure complexion and fair
beauty, and well she knew by experience already that 'love feeds on
suggestions--almost illusions,' as a French writer says; 'for the
greatest charm about a woman's dress is less what it displays than
what it only hints at;' and Annot had all that skill or taste in
costume which is a great speciality of London girls.

During the whole day after this arrival, and even the following one,
Hester was unpleasantly conscious that because Annot Drummond
absorbed Roland so entirely, he had scarcely an opportunity of
addressing herself alone, and still less of referring--beyond a
glance and a hand pressure or so forth--to that evening, on the last
minutes of which so much had seemed to hinge.

A little music usually closed each evening, and Annot performed, from
Chopin and others, various 'fireworks' on the piano, as Roland was
wont to term them; while at Hester's little songs, such as that one
to the air of the 'Briar Bush,' she openly laughed, declaring they
were quite 'too, too!'

Her voice was not so trained as Annot's, and was not remarkable for
strength or compass, but it was clear and sweet, fresh and true, and
she sang with unaffected expression, being well desirous of pleasing
her cousin Roland--her lover as she perhaps deemed him now.

Annot's song, after Hester had given a little _chanson_ from
Beranger--'_Du, du liegst mir im Herzen_,' accompanied--though sung
indifferently--with several _[oe]illades_ at Roland, gave her an
opportunity to make, what Hester termed, some of her 'wild speeches.'

'A sweet love song, Annot,' said the latter.

'A love song it is--but twaddle, you know,' replied Annot, turning
quickly the leaves of her music.

'Twaddle--how?'

'About marrying for love only and not money, Hester.  That is an
old-fashioned prejudice which is fast dying out, mamma tells me.
Thank Heaven I am poor!' she added, with a pretty shrug of her
shoulders.

'Why?' asked Hester.

'Because, when poor, one knows one is loved for self alone.'

The reply was made in a soft voice to Hester, yet her upward glance
was shot at Roland Lindsay, and she began a piece of music that was
certainly somewhat confused, while he--sorely puzzled--was kept on
duty turning over the leaves.

'Annot, I thought you were a finished performer!' said Hester with
some surprise and pique.

'I was taught like other girls at Madame Raffineur's finishing school
in Belgium; and I _can_ get through a piece, as it is called, without
many stoppages, though I often forget upon what key I am playing, and
use the pedals too at haphazard, yet they are beyond my skill; but I
find that whatever I play----'

'Even a noise?' suggested Hester.

'Yes, even a noise, while it lasts, puts down all conversation, and
when it is over everyone graciously says, "Thanks--so much!"  "Do I
sing?" is next asked, but I mean to practise so sedulously when I
return to London.'

'A bright little twaddler!' thought Hester, with a slight curl of her
handsome upper lip.

'You talked of the Row--you ride, I suppose?' said Roland to change
the subject.

'I have no horse,' replied Annot.

'No horse!  At Earlshaugh I shall get you an excellent mount.'

'Oh, thanks so much, cousin Roland!' replied Annot, and while running
her slender fingers rapidly to and fro upon the keys she gave him one
of her glances which were never given without 'point.'

'You seem pleased with her, Roland?' said Hester as they drew a
little way apart.

'Well, I think she is wonderfully fair.'

'Nothing more?'

'Well, fair enough, and all such little golden-haired women since the
days of Lucrezia Borgia, I suppose, make no end of mischief.'

'Roland!' said Hester, her eyes dilating.

Her cousin laughed, but knew not, perhaps, how truly and
prophetically he spoke.

'Did you like my song?' asked Hester, after a little pause.

'What song?'

'Can you ask me?  The little _chanson_ of Béranger, that you admire
so much.'

'Oh, yes--pardon me.'

'You were thinking of her when you should have been listening to
_me_,' said Hester with an unmistakable flash in her dark eyes, and
he felt the rebuke.

'Well--I was thinking, perhaps--but not as you suppose, or say,
Hester,' replied Roland, with a little laugh; but a time came when
Annot Drummond and her presence proved to be no laughing matter.

Days passed on now; whether it was that Annot was perpetually in the
way, or that no proper opportunity occurred--which in the circle of a
country house seemed barely probable--Roland did not seek for the
'lost chord,' or seem prepared to resume the thread of the sweet old
story that had been dropped so abruptly, and poor Hester felt in her
secret heart perplexed and piqued on a most tender point, and would
have been more than human had she been otherwise.

On an afternoon the quartette were seated under a spreading beech,
the girls idling over their tea, Roland and his uncle smoking, when
Annot suddenly proposed a walk to the ruins of Roslin Castle, through
the woods.  Roland at once rose and offered himself as escort; but
Hester, who had already begun to feel herself a little _de trop_--a
bitter and mortifying conviction--professed to have something to
attend to, and quietly declined the stroll, on which, with something
of an aching heart, she saw the two set forth together.

Archæology was not much in the way of Miss Annot Drummond, she knew;
but she also knew that if any ice remained between these two (which
was very improbable) it would be surely thawed before that stroll
ended, while in assisting her over stiles and through hedges Roland's
hand touched that of Annot, or when her skirt brushed him, as they
wandered through freshly mown meadows and under shady trees, by the
steep, narrow, and rocky paths that lead to the shattered stronghold
of the Sinclairs--the glances and touches and hand-clasps, enforced
by the surmounting of slippery banks and apparently perilous ditches,
where the beautiful ferns grow thick and green; and then the rambling
among the ruins that crown the lofty rock and overlook such lovely
and seductive scenery.

Of what might have passed Hester could only, yet readily, guess; her
heart was full of aching thoughts--full well-nigh to bursting at
times--when the pair returned, silent apparently, very happy too, and
inclined to converse more with their eyes than their lips; and
singular to say, that of the sylvan scenery of that wonderful glen,
and of the ruined abode of the whilom Dukes of Oldenburg and Princes
of Orkney, Annot Drummond seemed to have seen or noted--nothing; and
a sense of this, with what it implied, added to the secret
mortification of Hester.

Thus, despite herself, that evening at dinner the latter failed to
act a part, and scarcely spoke, but seemed to play with her knife and
fork rather than eat; and fortunately no one observed her, save
perhaps her father.  She was painfully listless, yet nervously
observant.

Had Roland Lindsay's thoughts not been elsewhere he must have seen
how already the change in her looks was intensified by the
brilliance, the sparkling eyes, and the soft, gay laughter of Annot,
and how, when she did speak, she nervously twisted her rings round
and round her slender fingers, seeming restless and _distraite_.

A charming girl was certainly no novelty to Roland; nor did he now
regard one--as in his boyhood--as a strange and mystic being to
worship.  He knew girls pretty well, he thought, also their ways and
pretty tricks, their fascinations and little artifices; yet those of
Annot--and she was a mass of them--assuredly did bewilder him and
attract his fancy, though he only admitted to Hester that she was as
'fashionably appointed and well-got-up a girl as could be found
within a three-mile radius of Park Lane.'

She was indeed full of sweet and winning--if cultivated--ways.  The
inflexions of her voice were very sympathetic, and the ever-varying
expression of her bright hazel eyes--albeit they were 'dashed' with
green--added to her fascination and influence; whilst she had a
childish and pleading way of putting her lovely white hands together
when she asked for anything that--as old Sir Henry said--'would melt
the heart of a cannon-ball.'

Then, with regard to Roland, she was always asking his advice about
some petty trifle or book (though she was not a reader), and deferred
to his opinion so sweetly that she gave him a higher idea of his own
intellect than he had ever possessed before; for she had all the
subtle finesse of flattery and flirtation, without seeming to possess
or exert either; and thus poor Hester was--to use a sporting
phrase--'quite out of the running.'

One night the latter had a new insight into her cousin's character,
though Annot now never spoke, nor could be got to speak, if possible,
of Roland Lindsay.

Prior to retiring to her bed, Annot had let down and was coiling up
her wonderful wealth of golden hair, which reached almost to her
knees; and she and Hester Maule, with whom she was still on perfectly
amicable and apparently loving terms, were exchanging their gossiping
confidences, as young girls often do at such a time; and on this
occasion Hester thought--for a space--she might be wrong in supposing
that Annot had any serious views upon Roland Lindsay, as she saw her
drop, and then hastily snatch up, a photograph on which she had been
gazing with a smile.

'Who is this, Annot?' asked Hester.

'Only old Bob.'

'Who?'

'Bob Hoyle,' replied Annot, laughing.

'Old; why, he seems quite a boy, In uniform, too.'

'He is not a boy, though I call him "old."'

'His age?'

'Is four-and-twenty; but I have known him so long, you know, Hester.'

'Since when?'

'Since he used to come and see his sister at Madame Raffineur's
school in Belgium.  He is awfully in love with me.'

'Is?' queried Hester, a little relieved of her suspicions.

'Well--was--when younger.'

'And now?'

'He loves me still, I have no doubt.'

'Do you mean to marry him?'

'He has never asked me.'

'Well, if he did--or does ask you?'

'I don't know about that,' said Annot, as with deft little fingers
she finished and pinned her golden coil.

'Why so?'

'Oh, cousin Hester, how inquisitive you are!  I like him immensely.
He says openly that he can't stand the London girls; that they are
all very well to flirt with, dance, drive, and talk with; but he
wants a wife who in her own sweet person will combine all the charms
of fashionable and domestic life, like me.  But then he is so poor;
has little more than his pay.  I can't fancy being poorer than I
am--love in a cottage is all bosh, you know; but I have promised
him----'

'What?'

'To think about it; but I won't be bound by promises, Hester.  When I
marry I want to be rich.  I must have a carriage, beautiful horses,
diamonds and dresses, for I have no _dot_ of my own.  Marry for love,
indeed!  No, no, Bob, dear.  Who in these days does anything so
absurd as that?  It is as much out of fashion as chivalry, duels, and
periwigs.'

'Oh, Annot--so young and so mercenary!' exclaimed Hester.

'Not mercenary, only practical, cousin.  Another dear fellow did so
love me last winter, Hester!' said the girl, with a dreamy smile.

'And now?'

'We are less than nothing to each other, Hester--after all--after
all.'

'How--why?'

'He was a second son--Mamma's _bête noire_; besides, a married lady
took him off my hands.'

'A married lady?' exclaimed Hester.

'Yes--oh, my simple cousin!  The mischief done in London nowadays by
married flirts would amaze you, Hester; but good-night, I am so
sleepy, dear.'

And kissing the latter with great _empressement_ on each cheek, Annot
departed to repose with one of her silvery laughs, leaving the
impression that if 'she was passing fair' she was also passing
heartless.




CHAPTER VIII.

'IT WAS NO DREAM.'

To Roland Lindsay there was some new and undefinable attraction
towards Annot Drummond, against which, to do him justice, he strove
in vain, and his eyes actually fell under the calm glance of his
cousin Hester.  'Call it what one may,' says a writer, 'that such a
power does exist, and most seriously influences our lives, is an
undoubted fact.  We may deride and deny it as we will; but who can
honestly doubt that the sudden and mutual attraction felt by two
persons who are in essential matters absolutely ignorant of each
other, does occur in the lives of most of us, and it is not to be
fought against or laughed away in any manner.'

Whether the attraction was quite _mutual_ in this instance remains to
be seen.  As yet the intercourse between Roland and Miss Drummond
_seemed_, with a little more _empressement_ of manner, merely the
well-bred companionship of two persons connected through mutual
relations and residence in the same pleasant country house; but the
change in Roland's manner to herself--veil it as he might--was subtly
felt by Hester, and became apparent even to her father, the otherwise
obtuse old Indian campaigner.

'He was ever attentive, full of fun, lightness, and merriment; but,
oh, there is no mistaking that there is a change now--a change since
_she_ came.  What can it be--what has come over him?' thought Hester.

'It is all very odd,' growled Sir Harry; 'I can't make out the
situation now.  Roland does not seem a flirting fellow, whatever the
girl may be, and she is plain when compared with my Hester; yet he
looks like a shorn Samson in the fairy hands of this little
golden-haired Delilah, and seems never happy except when with her.
It appears to me that people nowadays always fall in love when,
where, and with whom they ought not.  Ah, he is one of the "Lightsome
Lindsays;" yet I never saw anyone so changed,' added Sir Harry, who
had latterly found him wax weary of his Indian reminiscences.

Meanwhile Annot, who firmly believed in the dictum of Thackeray,
'that any woman who has not positively a hump can marry any man she
pleases,' quietly pursued her own course; and day by day it was
Hester's lot to see this courtship evidently in progress--herself at
times ignored and reduced to 'playing gooseberry,' as Annot thought
(if, indeed, she ever thought at all)--reduced again to her own inner
life once more; and knowing that nothing of it could interest them
now, so much did they seem bound in each other, she pursued her old
avocations among the poor and parish people more than ever.

The love--the budding love--he certainly once loved _her_--was less
than a shadow now!

She ceased to accompany them in their walks and long rambles in the
woody glen by Mavisbank and Eldin groves, and knowing the time when
Roland was certainly 'due' at Earlshaugh, she counted every hour till
he should leave Merlwood.

'What a couple of wanderers you have become!' said Sir Harry, a
little pointedly.

'Roland is so sympathetic,' simpered Annot; 'he appreciates fully all
my yearnings after the beautiful, of which we can see nothing in the
brick wilderness of London; and certainly your scenery on the Esk is
surpassingly lovely, uncle!' though in reality she cared not a jot
about it, and had somewhat the Cockney's idea of a landscape, 'that
too much wood and too much water always spoiled it.'

One evening matters had evidently reached a culminating point with
this pair.

Returning at a somewhat late hour for her, when the gloaming was
deepening into darkness, from visiting a poor widow, to whom she had
taken some comforts, Hester, on reaching Merlwood, paused in a garden
path to look around her, pleased and soothed by the calmness and
stillness of the dewy August evening, when not a sound was heard but
the ceaseless murmur of the unseen Esk far down below.  Suddenly,
amid the shrubbery, she heard familiar voices, to which she listened
dreamily, mechanically, at first; then, startled by their tenor, she
was compelled to shrink between the great shrubs, and--however
obnoxious and repugnant to her--was compelled to overhear; and till
indignation came, as she listened, there was a passionate, pleading
expression in Hester's eyes, which was unseen in the dark; as was the
quivering of the lip that came from the torture of the soul.

Roland was speaking in accents low and eager, and in others that were
broken and tremulous Annot was responding.

'You have made me so happy, dearest Roland, by the first whisper that
you--you loved me,' sighed the girl.

'I seem scarcely to recollect what happened to me before I met you
here, Annot,' said he.

'How so?' she asked coyly.

'It seems as if I had only existed then.'

'And now, Roland?'

'I live, my darling! for

  "In many mental forms I vainly sought
  The shadow of the idol of my thought,"

till now.  In three days more--only three--my little Annot--my
golden-haired darling, I shall have to leave you for Earlshaugh; and,
till you join me there, what will life be without you?'

He drew her close to him, and poor Hester shivered; but flight was
impossible.

'And what will life at Merlwood be to me?' replied, or rather asked,
Annot, in that caressing and cooing tone which she well knew was one
of her chief attractions.

'But Earlshaugh in time will be your home, Annot--yours, to make what
alterations you choose on the quaint old place.  You shall reign
there--the fairest and dearest bride that ever came within its walls.'

'Do not talk thus, Roland!'

'Why?'

'It makes me feel as if I were selling myself.'

'Annot!' he expostulated; and she answered with that low, cooing
laugh of hers which was such a wonderful performance.

'Now, tell me,' said she; 'were you ever in love before?'

'Why that question, Annot?'

'I have no motive--only curiosity, Roland--yet I could not bear to
think that you had ever loved anyone else as you do me.'

'I never did!  All men have, or have had fancies,' said he evasively.

'I don't mean a fancy--a real love!'

'Annot?'

'Did you ever ask a girl to marry you?'

'Never--never!  My darling--my pet--my little fairy--you alone have
crept into my heart and made it all your own!  With all their real
length, how short have seemed the August days since you came hither,
Annot!--how brief and swift the hours we spend together!
But--but--you must say nothing of all this, our hopes and our future,
to Hester.'

'No--oh no; I love you too fondly to have a confidant in the world.'

'I must seal your lips, dearest Annot,' interrupted Roland.  Then
came a pause and many caresses and many endearing names, as they
slipped softly away towards the lighted windows of the villa, and
left the agonized and startled listener free--for startled she was,
and, curiously enough, for all she had seen and suspected, she was
scarcely prepared for such a scene as this; and every caress she saw
had seemed to sink like a hot poniard into her heart, as she stole
away to her room, and strove to think, as one might in a dream.

Vague and numb was the first impression the episode made upon her,
till feverish jealousy and mortification made her clasp and wring her
hot, dry hands, and gnaw her nether lip, while burning tears rolled
down her cheeks, with the assurance that all was over now!

'After all--he meant nothing--nothing after all!' she muttered; 'why
did you make me love you so, Roland!'

The man she had loved--who fully, as far as manner and almost words
went, had answered her love for him, had meant nothing, but _pour
passer le temps_.  He had been, he thought perhaps, only kind,
friendly, cousinly, while she--great Heavens!--had been on the point
of laying her affectionate heart at his feet.

Oh, what humiliation was hers!

In explanation of the lateness of their return, they had been a long
walk, the loiterers said, away below Roslin Chapel; but said nothing
of what the walk had somewhat suddenly evolved.

When the gloaming was considerably advanced, and, though a ruddy
sunset lingered in the north-west, there was no moon in the sky,
where the evening star shone brilliantly, they had wandered down the
river-side--its current flowing like molten silver when seen between
and under the dark, overshadowing, and weird-like trees--to where, on
the summit of its high and grassy knoll, the beautiful chapel of
Roslin towered up between them and the sky-line--the solemn scene, as
Scott has preserved it, of one of the most thrilling and poetical of
all family presages of death and war; a legend deduced from the
tomb-fires of the Norsemen, and, doubtless, transplanted from our
stormy Northern Isles to the sylvan valley of the Esk by that old
Prince of Orkney, whose bride, Rosabelle, perished, and when the
chapel seemed filled with flame.

  'O'er Roslin all that dreary night,
    A wondrous blaze was seen to gleam!
  'Twas broader than the watchfire's light,
    And redder than the bright moonbeam.


Even as Roland was quoting these lines to Annot Drummond a wonderful
but natural effect took place.

'Look, Roland,' cried she with a thrill of real terror; 'look, the
chapel is on fire!'

'Oh, impossible,' said he, still intent on gazing on her sweet face.

'But look--look--it _is_!'

Whether she thought so or not Annot was evidently startled and
discomposed, while Roland certainly was not without momentary
astonishment.  A row of red lights appeared through the branches of
the dark trees high above where he and Annot stood.  It was the last
light of the orange and blood-red set sun gleaming though the double
row of chapel windows--the rich red light that is peculiar to
Scottish sunsets, and the phenomenon it produced had a powerful
effect upon the vision and minds of the beholders--even on the
volatile and unimaginative Annot, who, before the light faded out,
was not slow to understand and to utilize the situation in her own
way.

She clung to Roland in an access of terror apparently, and that it
was more than partly simulated certainly he never thought.  While
seeming to be terrified by the ghostly sight, she hid her face in his
neck; and then Roland felt it was all over with him!

'My darling--my darling, do not be so alarmed--it is only a transient
sunset effect,' said he, kissing her cheek.

'Don't, Roland, don't--oh, you must not do that,' she murmured.

But Roland did _that_, again and again--pressing his lips to her
eyes, her rippling hair--covering her face with kisses, while he half
lifted, half led her homeward, up the steep and winding path to
Merlwood, which they reached, as said, at a somewhat later period
than usual.

'Well,' thought Hester, as she bathed her face and eyes to remove all
traces of her late emotion, 'in three days I shall, for a time at
least, see and hear no more of this.  And yet--my heart will speak--I
have loved _him_--all my life--ever since he was a boy; and she has
known him, as it were, but yesterday!'

She put a hand to her forehead and pushed back the rings and rows of
heavy brown hair, as if their weight oppressed her.

'Thank Heaven!' she thought, 'I can make my life a useful and a busy
one, even here.  Thank Heaven for the refuge of another love, with
work and duty--love and duty to papa, and work for my poor people and
their little ones!  But why, oh why,' she added, while interlacing
her fingers behind her neck, and looking round her wildly, 'did he
love her after _all_?--why turn from me to her--that little
golden-haired doll, with her winning ways and heartless nature; and
how comes it that her languorous green eyes have power to awake such
a passion as filled every accent of Roland's voice in the gloaming
there?  She came when she was not wanted; and both are cruel,
heartless, treacherous!'

But, to do Annot justice, she knew nothing then of the tender
relations that had begun to exist between Hester and her cousin,
though we do not suppose that the knowledge would have much
influenced that enterprising young lady in her plans and views, her
wishes and purpose.

Hester felt that she had been ready enough--too ready, she now
feared--to show him all her own heart, till that other girl came, and
she thought till now that it had frozen up under Annot's presence and
too evident influence on him.

That evening she did not appear at dinner, but sent excuses
downstairs, and refused to receive even a visit from Annot.  That
would have been indeed too much to have undergone; but anon the
mental storm passed away; the ruddy dawn stole into Hester's bedroom,
and she rested her weary head against the open window to inhale the
fresh morning breeze that came up the woody valley of the Esk, and
over parterres of dewy flowers that were sweet enough to grace the
bank whereon the Queen of Elfin slept.


That day she saw on Annot's mystic finger--the fourth of the left
hand--a ring she had not observed before, and knew who was the donor,
and what the gift meant, but the knowledge could not give her a
keener pang.  She thought of Roland's gift, and of the emotions that
had filled her heart when he had clasped it round her neck.  She
could not return that gift to Roland without some reason; and she
apparently had none; but yet its retention was most repugnant to her,
and never would she wear it.  He had given it to her as his
cousin--nothing more, now it would seem.  Did he mean it so, _then_?

The dainty slippers, with blue embroidery on buff leather, which had
formed a portion of her daily and loving work, were relinquished now
and cast aside, too probably to be never finished.

Hester Maule felt all the shame and sorrow of loving one in secret,
whose heart and preference were given to another.  What evil turn of
Destiny had wrought this for her?  Why had she so mistaken--if she
_had_ indeed done so--his mere playful, cousinly regard for aught
else than its true value?

Yet--yet there had been times--especially on that night when he gave
her the jewels--that a gleam of tenderness, of yearning, of love had
lit up his dark eyes--an expression that had gone straight to her
heart and made every nerve thrill.  Why had she not guessed then--why
not foreseen what was to happen?  But the _future_ is always oddly
woven up with the _present_, we are told; and 'how strange are the
small threads that first begin to spin the great woofs of our life
story--unnoted, unheeded at the time--they stand out clearly and
plainly to our mental vision afterwards, and we ask ourselves with
bitter anguish, "Why did we not guess--why did we not foresee it?"
Better, perhaps, that the power of prevision is denied us, since we
can neither alter nor avert the doom that awaits us along the path of
life.'

We do not mean to palliate or defend the indecision--change of love
and regard--on the part of Roland Lindsay; but Hester had been from
his earliest years so much of a younger sister to him, that, though
loving, winning, and gentle, this golden-haired girl, with all her
_espièglerie_, her bold little speeches, and pretty touches and
tricks of manner, came as a new experience to him; and for the
present certainly, to all appearance, had enslaved and bewildered
him, dazzling his fancy to say the least of it.

Despite all her efforts, Hester, if she completely controlled her
manner, could not conceal her pain; thus her eyes seemed dull, even
sunken, and harsh lines marred the usual sweetness of her lips.  If
Roland noted these signs, he strove to ignore them.  Annot had
artfully instilled some petty jealous suspicions of young Skene of
Dunnimarle in Roland's mind, and he sought mentally to make these a
kind of apology to himself, while seeming indifferent to what the
girl might suffer, even when her presence (despite the arrangement
for secrecy she had overheard) scarcely at times interfered with the
_sotto voce_ babble of their lover-like but inane conversation.

To Hester it seemed as if she was in a bad dream, but

  'It was no dream, and she was desolate.'




CHAPTER IX.

THE OLD LOVE AND THE NEW.

So Roland Lindsay was engaged to Annot Drummond.  Hester could have
no doubt about that when she saw the ring upon her mystic finger; and
she supposed rightly that till he could ascertain definitely 'how the
land lay' at Earlshaugh nothing further was arranged, and at last, to
her supreme satisfaction--an emotion she once never thought to feel,
so far as Roland was concerned--the day of his departure for
Fifeshire came.

'I must turn up at Earlshaugh now,' said he, when the last evening
came.  'I have asked Jack Elliot, Skene, and one or two other
fellows, over for the covert shooting; and also, I suppose, I shall
have to give my attention to Mr. Hawkey Sharpe in the matters of
subsoil and drainage, mangold wurzel, and all that sort of thing.'

'I don't think he will trouble you much on these matters,' said Sir
Harry dryly.

'Why, uncle?'

'You will find that he deems them his own peculiar province and
_interest_ too,' replied Sir Harry, with a lowering expression of
eye; and that his once jolly old uncle's manner was now somewhat cool
to him Roland was unpleasantly sensible: and when the evening drew
on, and, knowing that he would depart betimes in the morning, he had
to bid Hester farewell, something of regret--even remorse--came
across his mind.  He suspected too surely all she had been led to
hope of him in the past--the love he could not give her now, at
least; and he strove to affect a light bearing to her, and appear his
old _insouciant_ self, while thinking over Annot's instilled
suspicions.

'Skene!' he muttered; 'was my regard for Hester a passing
infatuation, or an old revived fancy?  Was it likely to have proved a
lasting attachment if Annot had not come?  And in Hester would I have
but received the worn-out remnant of an attachment for another?  Do
not look so strange--so white, cousin,' said he in a low voice, as he
touched her hand.

'White am I?' asked Hester with inexpressible annoyance; 'if so, it
is caused by anxiety for papa--he is not strong, Roland.'

'Of course,' glad to affect or adopt any idea; 'but always trust to
me----'

'To _you_!'

'Yes; we have ever been friends, and shall be so always, I hope, for
I never forget that I am your cousin, though the privileges of such
might turn a wiser head than mine,' he added, unwisely, awkwardly,
and with a little laugh.

A gleam came into Hester's eyes, which always looked nearly as black
as night, and there was an angry curl on her red lip for a moment.

Bewildered--besotted, in fact--though Roland had become, by the
wiles, graces, and beauty of the brilliant Annot, it was impossible
for him not to feel, we say, some compunction, and keenly too, for
his treatment of the soft and gentle Hester.  He could not and dared
not in any fashion approach so delicate a subject with
her--explanation or exculpation was not to be thought of; yet he felt
reproach subtly in her manner; he could read it in her eyes, strive
to conceal her emotions as she might; and confusion made him blunder
again.

'Hester, we part but for a few days,' said he in a low voice, and
with more _empressement_ of manner than he had adopted for some time
past; 'we have ever been excellent friends, have we not, my dear
girl? and now we shall be more so than ever.'

Hester remained silent.  'Why now, more than ever?' thought she,
while his half-apologetic tone irritated and cut her to the heart,
and she knew that a much more tender leave-taking with Annot was over
and had taken place unseen; and now, indulging in dreamy thoughts of
her own, that young lady was idling over the keys of the piano.

'Will you miss me when I am gone?' he asked, with a little nervous
smile.

'No doubt you will be missed--by papa especially.'

'Well, I hope so.'

'Why?'

'It is nice to feel one's self important to others,' said he.  with
another awkward attempt at a jest; adding, 'May I?' as he lighted a
cigar.

She grew paler still; for a moment he looked sorrowfully into her
white-lidded and velvety dark blue eyes, and attempted to touch her
hand, but she shrank back.

'I should like,' he began, 'to stay a little longer, of course, but I
must go; the covert shooting is at hand, and Earlshaugh must wait me.'

'It is more than some do there, papa thinks.'

'The more reason for me to go, cousin,' said he, with darkening face.

'Go--and the sooner the better,' thought Hester bitterly; 'there is
now no middle course for me--for us; we must be everything or nothing
to each other--and nothing it is!'

'Good-night, Hester dear,' said he, still lingering.  'Adieu, Annot.
I shall be off to-morrow by gunfire, as we say in barracks, when all
are asleep in Merlwood.'

'Good-night.'

And so they parted, but not finally.

Early though the hour next day, Hester was too active by habit, too
much of a housewife, and too kind of heart to permit him to depart
without being down betimes to give him a cup of coffee and to see him
ere he went, despite his laboured apologies.  How fresh and bright
Hester seemed in her white morning dress, with all its frills--fresh
from her bath, and both clear-skinned and fair, as only a dark-haired
and dark-eyed girl usually looks at such a time, requiring none of
that powdering and other odious process now known as 'making up.'
Annot's low curtains remained closely drawn, and there was no sign of
that young lady, for the sun was barely over the woods of Hawthornden.

Hester tendered her soft cheek for Roland's farewell salute, and
carried it bravely off--better even than he did, as with a wave of
the hand he was driven away.

He was gone--_gone_, and had ceased to be hers.  Lingeringly the girl
looked around her.  To Hester every flower and shrub in the garden
seemed to have a voice and say so.  Every inanimate object told her
so again and again.  Fragments of his cigar lay about the gravel
walks; there yet swung his hammock between the trees; and there was
almost no task she could attempt now that was not associated with
him, and, worse than all, with Annot Drummond.

Long did Hester sit on a garden sofa, as the former could see from
her window, while brushing out her marvellous hair--sit with cold and
locked hands and pathetic eyes, motionless and miserable, as she
listened like one in a dream to the singing of the birds, the humming
of the bees around her, and the pleasant murmur of her native Esk.

The fair and beautiful girl saw this and knew the cause thereof; yet
in her great love and passion, if not in her artful design, she was
pitiless!

She was too well trained, she thought, by her mother to be otherwise.
Taught from her cradle to look upon wealth, and all that wealth could
obtain, as the chief object of life, she had from the days of her
short frocks and plaited hair, heard only of 'excellent matches,' of
'moneyed marriages,' and 'eligible men,' and so her mind was framed
in another world from Hester's.

Men, thought the latter, cared little for a love that was easily won,
she had read.  Perhaps Roland valued hers lightly thus.  Well, she
would assert herself--might even go to Earlshaugh, meet him beneath
his own roof, and in his own home show herself that she was
heart-whole, could she but act the part her innate pride suggested.

At first she avoided Annot, whom she heard hourly idling over the
piano; she felt, amid all her crushing and mortifying thoughts, that
she would be happier if busy, and so she bustled about the house
affecting to be dreadfully so; tied up, let down, snipped, and twined
rose-bushes in the garden, and strove to look happy and cheerful,
with a sick and sinking heart--even attempting to sing, but her voice
failed her.

On the other hand, the frivolous, emotional, and perhaps somewhat
sensuous nature of Annot required change, society, and above all some
exciting incident to keep her even in tolerable humour and mental
health; and now that she had no companion at Merlwood but Hester and
her old uncle, with his inevitable hookah and Indian small talk, she
became unmistakably _triste_ and fidgety, impatient and absent--only
awake and radiant when the postman was expected.  She felt utterly
bored by Merlwood now, and could not conceal her impatience to fulfil
her visit to Earlshaugh.

'I quite look forward to that event,' said she.

'No doubt,' assented Hester.

'It will be so delightful--a country house full of people, and mamma
not there to watch and scold me in private.'

'For what?'

'Ah, you should see or hear her after she has caught me idling much
with a detrimental, or daring to leave my hand in his for a moment.'

'Annot!'

'I fear that I am a natural born flirt, Hester.'

The latter made no reply, as she thought, a little disdainfully, that
these would-be artless speeches were merely meant to 'cast dust in
her eyes,' and with regard to her own visit to Fifeshire, she was
seldom twice in the same mood of mind.

'Invited to Earlshaugh--to meet, see, and associate hourly with him,
and with _her_, too, there!' Hester would think.  'Better feign
illness and stay at home--at sequestered Merlwood; but that would
only be putting off the evil day.  As her kinsman, she must meet him
some time and face it boldly--meet him as little more than a friend,
after all that had passed between them, and he had left--unsaid!'

'I cannot make you and Roly--I mean Roland--out!' said Annot on one
occasion.

'How?' asked Hester.  'I do not understand you.'

'I always thought myself quick in discovering cases of spoon----'

'Don't be slangy, Annot.'

'Slang or not, you know the phrase and all it expresses!'

'Well?'

'When I first came here I made up my mind that Roland was entirely
yours, though I could not be sure whether you returned his regard;
but after being with you both for nearly a month, I find myself quite
at a loss.'

'Do you?' said Hester icily.

'Yes--you parted last night without the least sign of regret or
emotion, and all that sort of thing.'

'How dare she attempt to quiz me thus?' thought Hester, feeling
almost that she could strike the smiling little speaker; 'how dare
she?--but she knows not all I know--all I was compelled to overhear!'

So, as days passed on, beyond dark shadows under her eyes, the result
of broken nights, there was little bodily sign of what Hester endured
mentally.

'Why, Hester, you have really and truly received a letter at last
from Earlshaugh!' exclaimed Annot one morning, to Hester's annoyance
and pique, as the former quickly recognised the coat of arms and
post-mark; and that Annot, who received missives from the same source
daily, should jest over the event, made Hester, with all her innate
gentleness of heart, almost hate the speaker.

It was from Roland at last, thanking her and Sir Harry for their
great kindness to him, and hoping to see her and Annot Drummond
together at Earlshaugh at the time proposed.

Nothing more!

'Go to Earlshaugh--no--no!' was again Hester's first thought, with a
kind of shudder; 'to be with _them_ morning, noon, and evening--the
feeling would madden me--yet how am I to excuse myself?'

'You never go from home now, papa,' she took an opportunity of saying
as she wound her soft arms round Sir Harry's time-silvered head and
drew it down upon her breast; 'and seldom though I do so, I wish to
escape this visit to Earlshaugh--I am most loth to leave you.'

'For a few weeks--a few miles' distance!'

'But who will take my place when I am gone?  Who will make your
breakfast so early, cut the papers, and brighten up the fire for
you----'

'The housekeeper, of course.'

'Deck the room with flowers; walk with you along the woody paths by
the river?  Who will read, play, and sing to you at night?  I do not
wish to go at all, papa--let Annot go alone.'

'Nonsense, girl!  I shall miss you, of course, but it is only for a
time,' said her father, who knew and felt well that it was in the
nature of Hester to think and anticipate his every wish, and do all
that in its truest and holiest sense made Merlwood a _home_ for him.

'You are not worrying yourself about anything, dear?' said the old
gentleman, who had his own thoughts on the matter, as he put an arm
caressingly round her, and eyed her anxiously.

'Of course not, papa,' replied Hester with assumed briskness; 'about
what should I worry?'

'Little troubles look big at times,' said he, laying his head back in
his easy-chair.

Her trouble was not a little one, however, and while pursuing his own
thoughts her father made her pale cheek grow paler still.

'Annot seems to have taken a great fancy to Roland; but the fancies
of town-bred girls are often mere moonshine.'

'Not the fancies of such girls as Annot, with a home-like Earlshaugh
in prospective,' said Hester, with a forced laugh, as she recalled
Annot's several confidences.

'Ah!' muttered the old gentleman dubiously, while tugging his wiry
white moustache; 'still, it may be a fancy that will pass,' he
continued, still pursuing his own thoughts; 'and things always come
right in the end.'

'On the stage and in novels, papa,' replied Hester, laughing outright.

'But they _do_ wind up rightly, dear, even in real life sometimes.'

'You know, papa, it is always said that no man ever marries his first
love.'

'It may be so, Hester--it may be so; but one thing you may be sure
of, if he is a true man.'

'And that is--

'He never can forget her.'

Sir Harry's eyes kindled, and his voice grew soft as he said this;
for his thoughts were wandering away to the wife of his youth--she
who now lay in the old kirkyard above the Esk--and of whom Hester
seemed then a living reproduction, or the old man thought so; and
when he spoke thus in the love and chivalry of his heart, he revived
in Hester a moth-like desire to go to Earlshaugh after all, such is
the idiosyncrasy of human nature; and as some one has it, 'to suffer
that self-immolation, which is common to unhappy lovers.  She longed
to see Roland once more'--to feast her eyes upon the man who seemed
happy with another, no matter what the after-pain might be.

What she meant to say or do, or how to look--when this new fancy
seized her--she knew not.  She only knew that--meanly, she
thought--she hungered and thirsted for the sound of his voice and a
glance of his eyes, before, perhaps, he--even as the husband of Annot
Drummond--went to Egypt or elsewhere, it might be to return, perhaps,
no more.

Meanwhile, that 'fair one with the golden locks' was all feverish
impatience till the time came for quitting Merlwood, and had no doubt
that Roland would cross the Forth to meet her.

'You seem strangely interested in the movements of Roland,' said Sir
Harry rather grimly to her.

'He is almost half a cousin, is he not, uncle?' said Annot, in her
most cooing and caressing way; 'but no one would think me so foolish
as to lose my heart to a mere cousin.'

'None will suspect you of such a loss, indeed,' observed Hester, with
some pardonable bitterness, as she recalled all she had so
unwillingly overheard in the shrubbery on that eventful evening.




CHAPTER X.

ROLAND'S HOME-COMING.

Let us return to the day of Roland Lindsay's departure from Merlwood,
when full of thoughts of a sorrowful cast, and perhaps in the frame
described by Wordsworth as

  'That sweet mood when pleasant thoughts
  Bring sad thoughts to the mind.'


A letter that had come for him overnight--one from Annot's mother in
South Belgravia--he scanned twice hurriedly, and consigned to his
pocket.  Annot, in that quarter, had made no secret, apparently, of
the terms on which he and she were, and the congratulations of the
old lady were palpable enough.

'What is next?' he muttered, as he opened a little basket and
laughed.  It contained sandwiches and sherry, peaches, grapes, and a
little bouquet of hot-house flowers, all selected, he knew, by the
white hands of Hester.

'Poor girl!' he muttered; 'does she think I am bound, not for
Earlshaugh, but for Alexandria?'

He had beautifully-coloured photos of both girls in his pocket
book--one of Annot, smiling, saucy, and arch, with her laughing eyes
and golden hair; and one of Hester, with her calm, sweet expression,
her dark, beseeching, and pleading eyes, and hair of rich dark brown;
but he had one of the former's fair tresses--not the first of them
that Annot had bestowed on 'Bob Hoyle' and others that he knew not
of.  But so it is--

  'Fair tresses man's imperial race ensnare,
  And beauty draws us with a single hair.'


Merlwood had vanished as the train sped on, and, away from the
immediate influence of Annot, softer memories of Hester began to
mingle upbraidingly with the idea of the former, and--as he thought
it all over again--the past; he recurred mentally to many a loving
and half-ended episode, to Hester's winning softness, her pleading,
truthful eyes of violet blue, and he felt himself, though uncommitted
by pledge or promise, inexpressibly false!

It was not a pleasant reflection or conviction even while caressing
Annot's shining tress of hair--his tempter and her supplanter.

Some men, it has been said, when they form a new attachment, try to
teach themselves that the old one contained no true love in it.  This
was not the case with Roland, nor could he be a man to love two at
once, though some natures are thought to be capable of such an
idiosyncrasy.

At last he was roused from his mingled day-dreams by his train
clanking into the Waverley Station, and he saw Edinburgh, the old
town and the new, with gables, spires, and tower-crowned rocks rising
on each side of him, with a mighty bridge of round arches high in air
spanning the space between.

The day was yet young, so he idled for a time at the United Service
Club with Jack Elliot, his comrade in Egypt, on leave like himself,
and now his sister Maude's _fiancé_, a fine, handsome, and
soldier-like young fellow, of whom more anon--full of such earnest
love and enthusiasm for the girl of his unwavering choice, that
Roland--reflecting on his late proceedings at Merlwood--felt his
cheek redden more than once, as well it might, and an involuntary
sigh escaped him, though he could little foresee the _future_.

So full was he of his own thoughts, that it was not until he was
landing on the Fife side of the Forth that he reflected with
annoyance:

'What a fool I have been, when in the city, not to call upon old
MacWadsett, the W.S., about the exact terms of my father's will.
They never reached me in Egypt--the Bedouins at Ramleh made free with
the mail-bags.  Besides, I need not have gone before this, as the old
fellow has been on the Continent.'

So he consoled himself with the inevitable cigar, while the train
rolled on by many a familiar scene, on which he had not looked for an
age, as it seemed now; by the 'lang, lang town' of Kirkaldy, and
picturesque Dysart, with its zigzag streets, overlooked by the gaunt
dwelling-place of Queen Annabella, and the sea-beaten rock of
Ravenscraig; anon past Falkland Woods, and after he crossed the Eden
he began to trace the landmarks of Earlshaugh, and the train halted
at a little wayside station, close beside an old and almost unused
avenue that led to the latter, and he sprang out upon the platform,
where he seemed to be the only passenger.  The two or three officials
who were loitering about were strangers, and eyed him leisurely.

'Has not a trap come for my luggage?' he asked.

'For where, sir?'

'Earlshaugh.'

'No sir,' replied one, touching his cap, an ex-soldier recognising
his questioner's military air.  'No trap is here.'

'Strange!' muttered Roland, giving his moustache an angry twist; 'and
yet I wrote--I'll walk on, and send for my things,' he added.

The house was little more than a mile distant, and every foot of the
way had been familiar to him from infancy.

On many a strange and foreign scene had he looked, and many a peril
had he faced, in the land of the Pharaohs since last he had trod that
shady avenue--the land of the Sphinx and the Pyramids, where the hot
sand of the desert seemed to vibrate and quiver under the fierce
glare of the unclouded sun.

Forgetful of old superstitions, he had entered the avenue by the
Weird Yett.  It was deemed unlucky for a Lindsay of Earlshaugh to
approach his house after a long absence through that barrier; but as
the gate was open, Roland, full of his own thoughts, passed in,
heedless of the legend which told that the Lindsay fared ill who did
so.

Two stone pillars, dated 1600, with an arch and coat of arms with the
Lindsay supporters, two lions sejant, termed the barrier, which was
usually closed by a massive iron gate, the barbs or pikes of which
had once been gilt.  A century later had seen it the favourite
trysting-place of Roland Lindsay, the younger, of Earlshaugh, and a
daughter of a neighbour, the Laird of Craigie Hall, till the former
left with his regiment, the Scots Guards, for Spain.  One evening the
girl was lingering there, in the soft violet light of the gloaming,
impelled by what emotion she scarcely knew, but doubtless to dream of
her lover who she thought was far away, when suddenly a cry escaped
her, as she saw him appear, in his scarlet uniform, with
feather-bound hat--the Monmouth cock--his flowing wig, and sword in
its splendid belt; but gouts of blood were upon his lace cravat, and
she could see that his face was sad and pale, as face and figure
melted away and she found herself alone.

Apparitions generally 'come in their habits as they lived,' says the
authoress of the 'Night side of Nature,' 'and appear so much like the
living person in the flesh that when they are not known to be dead,
they are frequently mistaken for them.  There are exceptions to this
rule, but it is very rare that the forms in themselves exhibit
anything to create alarm.'

So did the girl's lover appear to her as if alive.

With a power of reason beyond her years and time, she tried to
think--could it be a dream of her excited brain?  But no, she was
awake with all her senses; she thought of the blood on his dress, and
the awful knowledge came to her, that she had looked upon the face of
the dead--on the wraith of her lover--who, a month after she learned,
had perished at that very hour and time, shot by the Spaniards on the
fatal field of Almanza.

'The divine arts of priming and gunpowder have frightened away Robin
Goodfellow and the Fairies,' wrote Sir John Aubery of old; but the
ghost of the Weird Yett lingered long in the unused avenue of
Earlshaugh.

When he did recall the terror of his boyhood, Roland smiled; but
kindly, for every feature round him spoke of _home_.  Seen through
the tree-stems was the old thatched hamlet of Earlshaugh, on the side
of a burn crossed by one huge stone as a bridge--the hamlet where the
clatter of the weaver's loom still lingered even in these days of
steam appliances, and on the humble doors of which the old Scottish
risp or tirling-pin was to be seen as elsewhere in the East Neuk; and
as he looked at the gray fallen monolith by which the stream was
crossed, he thought of the old song which seemed to describe it:

  'Yet it had a bluirdly look,
    Some score o' years ago,
  An' the wee burn seemed a river then,
    As it roared doon below;
  And a bauld bairn was he,
    In the merry days lang gane,
  Wha waded through the burn,
    Aneath the auld brig-stane.'

And, as if to complete the picture, an old woman, wearing one of
those white mutches, with the modest black band of widowhood,
introduced by Mary of Guelders, sat on a 'divot-seat' knitting at the
sunny end of her little thatched cottage.

A love of his birthplace and a pride in his historic race were the
strongest features in the character of Roland Lindsay, and Earlshaugh
was certainly such a home as any man might be pardoned for regarding
with something of enthusiasm.

As he looked upon the old manor house, high, square, and embattled,
towering on its grassy steep above the haugh--that abode of so many
memories, with all his pride in it, and pride of race and name, there
came a stormy emotion, or sense of humiliation--even of rage, when he
thought of the tenor or alleged tenor of that will, by which his
father, in the senility of age (if all he heard were true), had
degraded him to a cypher by leaving the estate entirely to an alien,
to his second wife, who had been the artful companion of his
first--to the exclusion of him--Roland, the heir of line and blood,
save for such a pittance or allowance as she chose to accord him, for
the term of his or her natural life, which, when the chances of war
and climate were considered, was certain to exceed his own, his
senior though she was in years.

After all he had endured in the deserts by the Nile, hunger, thirst,
suffering, sickness, and wounds, facing and enduring all that a
soldier may since last he had looked on old, gray Earlshaugh, as
memory went flashing back he strove to forget for a brief time the
wrong his father had done himself and his sister Maude, and to think
only of his happy boyhood, and all that had been then.

Memories of his dead parents, of his gentle and loving mother, of his
manly and fox-hunting father, who had taught him to ride, and shoot,
and fish--of little brothers who lay buried by their side in the
grave--of his childhood, of games, and old--or rather young--longings
and imaginings, when the woods of Earlshaugh, and the trouting
stream, were objects of vague mystery, the former peopled with
fairies, and the latter the abode of a wicked kelpie!

Many a living voice and loving face had passed away since
then--vanished for ever; but the memories of them were strong and
pathetic.  The rooks still clamoured in the old trees, and the birds
sang amid the shrubberies as of old; he heard the men whistling and
singing in the stable-yard.  In the fields the soil had a fresh and
grassy odour in the noonday sunshine familiar to him; and he felt the
conviction that though he in many a sense had changed, Nature had
not--'for the wind blows as it will through all the long years, and
the land wakes glad and fragrant at the kiss of the pale dawn, and
plain daily labour goes on steadily and unheedingly from generation
to generation.'

As unnoticed and unseen he drew near the house--a massive old
Scottish fortalice with tourelles at every angle--and surveyed its
striking façade, he recalled the words of his uncle and Hester, and
felt that he had now much that was practical to think about, much
that was painful and dubious to forgive or submit to, while a vague
sense of coming bitter annoyance--it might be humiliation, as we have
said--rose before his haughty spirit, and the suspicion or emotion
was not long of being put to the test.

A man with his hands in the back pockets of his coat, his hat set
negligently into the nape of his neck--a thickset, well-to-do, little
fellow, about thirty years of age, clad in a kind of semi-sporting
style, with a straw in his mouth and much display of jewellery at his
waistcoat--came leisurely down the front steps from a
_porte-cochère_, which the late Laird had added to the old
house--leisurely, we say, and with a very _insouciant_ air, and
accorded a nod--bow it could not be called--to Roland and paused.

'Oh,' said he, 'Captain Lindsay, I presume?'

'Yes,' replied the other, with surprise, and curtly.

'Ah, welcome; we've been expecting you.  Did you walk from the
station?'

'I was obliged to do so----'

'Ah.'

'And you, sir?' asked Roland inquiringly.

'Mr. Sharpe--Hawkey Sharpe, at your service.'

'The new steward?' said Roland, repressing a vehement desire to kick
him along the terrace.

'If you please to call me so.'

('What the devil else does he think I should call him?' thought
Roland.)

As Mr. Hawkey Sharpe neither touched nor lifted his hat Roland
ignored his tardily proffered hand, which was replaced in his coat
pocket.

'Had a pleasant morning journey, I hope.'

'Yes.'

'Ah, I am just going to the stables--all are well at home,' said this
strange and very confident personage, passing on, while Roland stood
for a moment rooted to the ground by the profound _insouciance_ of
the man; but from _that_ moment there was a secret, if unnamed,
hatred of each other in the eyes of these two--hate blended with
contempt and indignation in those of Roland, who felt intuitively
that the other, though, as he supposed, his underling, would yet work
him a mischief if he could.

'D--n the fellow!' thought Roland.  'So this is Mr. Sharpe.  I must
put him to the rightabout!  He ought to have ushered me in or
preceded me.'

He rang the bell furiously.

A strange footman appeared promptly enough, but without the
indignation a 'London Jeames' would have manifested at a summons so
rough and impatient; for natheless his irreproachable livery and
powdered hair, he had been born and bred in the East Neuk of Fife,
and had no 'West-End' airs about him.

'All are strangers now hereabout,' thought Roland, who was about to
enter, when the man distinctly barred his way.

'Name, sir, please?' said he.

'Is Miss Maude--Miss Lindsay, I mean--at home?'

'No, sir; out riding.'

'Your mistress, then?' said Roland sharply.

'Yes, sir--if you will give me a card.'

'Card, ha!' exclaimed Roland, losing his temper now, and with fury
blazing in his dark eyes.  'Say that Captain Lindsay has arrived!'

On this the valet--Tom Trotter by name--threw the door wide open,
with a grin of welcome not unmingled with astonishment and alarm, and
Roland found himself again under the roof of Earlshaugh.




CHAPTER XI.

A COLD RECEPTION.

Roland found himself somewhat ceremoniously ushered into a
drawing-room with which he was familiar, and which was known as the
Red Room, where he was left at leisure for a few minutes, to look
about him and reflect.

The second Mrs. Lindsay had been too wise, he could perceive, to
remove much of the ancient furniture of the manor house, but she had
interspersed it with much that was modern; large easy seats and rich
hangings, gipsy tables, Chippendale chairs, and great rugs, Parian
statuary, and one or two antique classic busts, had caught Roland's
eye as he passed along; but all old portraits were banished to the
staircases and corridors, for it had seemed to the intruder on their
domains that the grim old Lindsays in ruff and breastplate, with hand
on hip and sword in belt, with their dames in hoops and old-fashioned
Scottish fardingales, had rather scowled upon her.

The Red Room of Earlshaugh had been one of the 'show places' in the
East Neuk, for nearly all its furniture was of red lacquer work,
brought from Japan by a Lindsay in the close of the last century.
The walls were hung with stamped leather, the golden tints of which
had faded now, though the gilding gleamed out here and there, and
against this sobered background the richly tinted furniture, with its
painted suns, moons, and stars, grotesque monsters, and queerly
designed houses and gardens, stood out redly and boldly, with
bronzes, marbles, and ivory carvings now yellow with age.

It was noon now, and through the open and deeply embayed windows the
perfume of many flowers stole in from the gardens below, mingling
with that from roses and others that were in the _jardinières_, and
to Roland it all seemed as if he had stood there only yesterday.

There was a sound; he turned and found himself face to face with his
stepmother, whom he had last seen and known as his own mother's
useful, bland, suave, apparently patient and always obsequious
companion.

'Welcome, Roland, at last,' said she; but there was no welcome either
in her voice or eye, though she accorded him her hand, and a kiss
that was as cold as the expression of her face, though it was
apparent that she was trying to get up a pathetic look for the
occasion; in fact, she felt the necessity for a little acting--of
assuming a virtue, if she had it not--and Roland saw and understood
the whole situation at once, for after a few commonplaces, and he had
flung himself into a chair that had once been a favourite one of his
father, she asked:

'How long does your leave of absence from the regiment last?'

'So shortly,' replied Roland with an undisguised sneer, 'that I won't
mar your pleasure or spoil your appetite by telling its duration.'

At this reply she coloured for a moment, and thought, 'We have here
an independent and conceited young man, who must be kept at his
proper distance.'  But she only caressed Fifine, an odious little pug
dog, which she carried under her arm.

And avoiding all family matters, which, sooth to say, Roland
disdained to discuss with her, even his father's death, more than all
the alleged terms of the odious will and similar subjects, they
talked the merest commonplaces--of the weather, the crops, the
country, and of the war in Egypt--but all in a jerky and unconnected
fashion, as each felt that a moment might land them on that dangerous
ground which was inevitably to be traversed yet.

'And Maude?' said Roland during a pause; 'she must be quite a
grown-up young lady now.'

'Yes, she is close on twenty; but I do not see much of Maude.'

'Why?'

'She stays away from Earlshaugh as much as she can, with friends in
Edinburgh, London, and elsewhere.'

While closely observing his stepmother, Roland was compelled to admit
to himself that she was ladylike.  In her fortieth year, her hair was
fair and thick; her stature good; her hands well-shaped and white,
but somewhat large.

Her face was perfectly colourless; her eyes small, glittering, of the
palest gray, planted near a thin and aquiline nose; her lips were
also thin, not ill-tempered, but like her whole expression--hard.
Her teeth were small and sharp-looking; her face lineless--she looked
ten years younger than she was, and was beautifully, even tastefully,
dressed.

She wore now, as she always did, a handsome-trimmed black costume of
the richest material, with a white cap of fine lace, slightly trimmed
with black, as a sign of widowhood, and jet ornaments, with a few
pearls among them.

'I do so long to see my dear little Maude!' exclaimed Roland.

'You have been in no hurry to do so,' said Mrs. Lindsay, with a cold
smile.

'My uncle at Merlwood was so hospitable,' replied Roland, reddening a
little.  Could he say to Mrs. Lindsay that _her_ presence had kept
him away from Earlshaugh to the last moment, or refer to the new
influence of Annot Drummond on himself?  'By-the-bye,' said he
abruptly, 'I met a fellow at the door--Mr. Hawkey Sharpe by name, it
seems--who I understand has been installed here as a kind of steward
or general factotum.'

'What of him?'

'Only that I have made up my mind that he shall march from this, and
pretty quick too!'

'There may be some difficulties about that,' replied Mrs. Lindsay,
with a hectic flush crossing her pale cheek, and a sharp glitter in
her cold gray eyes.

'Difficulties--how?  With old MacWadsett?'

'With more than him.'

'What do you mean?  By Jove, we shall soon see.'

'What we shall _see_,' muttered Mrs. Lindsay under her sharp teeth;
but Roland, who could not be perfectly suave with her, now asked
sharply:

'Why was there not a vehicle--trap--phaeton, or anything else, sent
to meet me at the station?'

'Was there none?' she asked languidly.

'None--and I had to leave my luggage there.'

'Dear me--how negligent--eh, Fifine, was it not?' said she, toying
with the ears of her cur.

'Negligent, indeed,' added Roland, his brow darkening.  'Yet I read
your letter--or telegram was it?--to Mr. Sharpe.'

'You read my letter to--Mr. Sharpe?'

'At least that portion of it referring to your return.'

'Mr.--what's his name?--Sharpe had better act up to his cognomen
while I have to do with him.  I am accustomed to be obeyed.'

'Like the Centurion in the Scriptures--dear me!'

'Exactly,' said Roland, feeling that there was mockery in her tone or
thoughts.

'If not?'

'We are accustomed to obedience in barracks, and enforce it.  We have
the guard-house to begin with.'

'An institution unknown in Earlshaugh,' said she, with a curl on her
lips.

'I have a number of friends coming here to knock over the birds after
the 1st--you will please to order arrangements to be made for them.'

'A houseful--I have heard from Maude.'

'Not at all--only Elliot of ours, Skene of Dunnimarle, and one or two
more.  My cousin Hester and Miss Drummond come too.'

'Must you do this--must I entertain them all?' said she with
something like dismay.

'You?  Not at all!  Let them alone--they will amuse themselves as
people in a country house always do.  Young fellows and pleasant
girls generally contrive to cut out their own amusements.'

'I see so few people now that I shall be quite scared.'

'Let Maude act hostess then,' said Roland sharply, with a tone that
seemed to indicate he thought it more her place.

'Maude is but a little child in my eyes--and none can take my
position in Earlshaugh!' said Mrs. Lindsay firmly and pointedly; and
Roland, tired of an interview, the whole tenor of which provoked him,
and in which an undefined and ill-disguised hostility to himself was
manifested, looked at his watch and asked:

'Any chance of lunch, do you think?'

'Lunch?'

'Yes.  When a fellow has travelled nearly forty miles in a morning,
and crossed the Firth, he wants something to pick him up.'

'Lunch is past already,' said Mrs. Lindsay stiffly; 'but ring the
bell, please.'

She made no attempt with effusive hospitality to rise from her seat.
That would have implied kindness, attention, and, more than all, it
would have involved exertion; and she was contriving now to be one of
those imperturbable creatures who never allow themselves to be
influenced or bored; and when Roland withdrew to the familiar
dining-room to partake of the meal, and where he was welcomed by
jolly old Simon Funnell, his father's rubicund butler, with shining
face and outstretched hands, she did not accompany him; nor did he
observe, when he left her, how her pale face expressed by turns
dread, defiance, hatred, and more!

One would have supposed that the mere difference of sex might have
affected her, and made her disposed to view favourably, and to greet
pleasantly at least, the only son of the man to whose folly she owed
so much--a handsome young fellow, whose face made even those of old
women brighten.  But it was not so; and thus bitterly did Roland
Lindsay feel that his home-coming, with all its sense of irritation
and humiliation, was such that, but for Maude and those at Merlwood,
he would have regretted that he did not perish after Kashgate, when
he lay helpless in the desert, with the foul Egyptian vultures
hovering over him.




CHAPTER XII.

MAUDE.

Lunch ended, Roland was lingering rather gloomily over a glass of his
father's old favourite Amontillado, which Simon Funnell had
disinterred from the cobwebby bins of the cellar for his special
delectation, when an exclamation made him start; a pair of soft arms
were thrown around his neck, and a bright, fair face was pressed
against his cheek.

'Maude!'

'Roland--Roland--you here! oh, such an unexpected joy!' exclaimed his
sister, a merry and impulsive girl, who had just returned from
riding, in bearing so smart, handsome, and perfect in her hat and
habit, as she tossed aside her whip and gauntlets and embraced him
again and again, so effusively and affectionately that he felt an
emotion of welcome for the first time.

'I am here, Maude--but why did you not come to meet me?' said he.

'I knew not that you were to be here to-day,' she replied, with a
sparkle in her eyes.

'Did your--did not Mrs. Lindsay tell you I was coming?'

'No,' replied Maude indignantly.

'Another act of coldness and unwelcome.'

'Oh, Roland--how I dread these people!'

'Who?'

'Mrs. Lindsay and her Mr. Sharpe!  I have just had a spin over breezy
Tentsmuirs, making the sheep and rabbits fly before me, as you and I
and Hester Maule have often done before, Roland,' said Maude,
changing abruptly from grave to gay.

Full of health and spirits, with a soft rose-leaf complexion that was
heightened by recent exercise and present excitement, she was a girl
whose beauty was of a delicate type.  Her hair was of the sunniest
brown, her eyes a soft and dreamy blue, yet wont to beam and sparkle
at times; her figure was slight, extremely graceful, and she was now
in her twentieth year.

'By Jove, Maude, you have grown quite a little beauty!' exclaimed
Roland, while, holding each other at arm's length, brother and sister
surveyed each other's face; 'but in expression you are not changed a
bit.'

'Nor you, Roland--yet, how scorched--how brown you are!'

'That was done in Egypt--but much of it wore off at Merlwood.'

'How long you have been of coming here, Roland!' said Maude, with a
pout on her ruby lip.

'Since returning to Britain, you mean?'

'Since returning to Scotland.'

'With all my love for you, my dear little sister, I was loth to face
the--the mortifications that I feared awaited me at home.'

'A changed home, Roland!'

'If we can call it so.'

'But then at Merlwood,' said she archly, 'Hester--dear Hester, would
be an attraction, of course.'

Roland actually coloured, and stooped to scrape a cigar light on his
heel, and to change the subject said:

'I saw Jack Elliot of ours for a few minutes at his club in
Edinburgh.'

'Dear Jack! and how is he looking?'

'Well and jolly as usual; unluckily his leave is shorter than mine,
yet I hope to keep him here till the pheasants are ready.'

'Darling Roland--how good of you!' exclaimed his sister, kissing him
again.

'You and he expect your little affair to come off when----'

'When the regiment returns home--I could not go out to Egypt, you
know, Roland.'

'Worse than useless, when we may be moving towards the frontier
again.'

'In her last letter to me Annot Drummond seemed full of Egypt, and
Egypt only.'

'She has a lover out there, perhaps--or going,' said Roland, laughing.

'Not improbable.  She is coming here; but, truth to tell, I do not
like Annot Drummond much.'

'Why?'

'I cannot say.'

'Nay, Maude, that is unjust.'

'It is a case of Dr. Fell, I suppose.'

'Yet you have invited her for a month or two to Earlshaugh.'

'Yes.'

'Why, then?'

'As a return for her mother's kindness to me when in London--nothing
more.  There is no love lost between Annot and me.'

Roland became silent, as his sister evidently spoke unwillingly; and
to change the subject, he said:

'And the stepmother, Maude; how do you and she get on?'

'As my letters have told you--oh, I hate her, as much as it is in my
nature to hate anyone.  When she comes near me I feel like a cat with
its fur rubbed the wrong way.  Can you not pension her away from
Earlshaugh?'

'Not if all I hear is true,' replied Roland, giving his dark
moustache an angry twist.  'But who is this fellow Sharpe, who seems
to be her factotum--and where did she pick him up?'

'He is her brother.'

'Her _brother_!'

'Yes--so you must be wary----'

'Till I see MacWadsett?'

'If that will make any difference, which I fear not,' replied Maude,
lowering her voice, and actually glancing round with apprehension,
while her blue eyes lighted with indignation; 'he lives here--perhaps
she told you so?'

'No--lives here--here in Earlshaugh?'

'Yes; he has rooms set apart for him in the Beatoun wing.'

'By _her_ orders?'

'Yes.  She has the whole estate, and you and me too, completely in
her power.  Papa, in his folly, left her, apparently, everything; but
to come to us, I presume, in time; and now she is entirely influenced
and guided by her brother.  Literally, we seem to be at his mercy,'
continued the girl, with a kind of a shudder, 'and you must play your
cards well to prevent a catastrophe.'

'It is intolerable!' exclaimed Roland, in an accent of rage.

'It is beyond my comprehension.'

'I wish old MacWadsett were at home.'

'He will not be in town for some weeks yet.'

Some bitter words escaped Roland, who added:

'God, give me patience!  A fracas in the house with so many guests
coming is, of course, to be avoided.'

'I hope your return may make some change, Roland; it has been so dull
here.'

'Why--how?'

'County people--the ladies at least--are shy of visiting, I feel
that, and often long to join Hester at Merlwood.  You may see that
the calling cards in the basket are quite faded and old.'

'No visitors!'

'Very few, beyond the parish minister and his wife, or the doctor,
when she has some petty illness.  She was a reader, a worker, and a
musician in mamma's time, I understand; but is a total idler now,
and, save to church, rarely leaves the grounds.'

'Her dowry and the Dower House she was entitled to, but who could
ever have dreamed that she, the meek-faced, humble, and most
obsequious Deborah Sharpe would ever be the mistress of all this!'
exclaimed Roland as he strode to a window and looked forth upon the
view with a heart that thrilled with many mingled emotions, for he
loved his ancestral home with a love that was a species of passion,
especially after his term of foreign exile.

Its situation was so perfect, overhanging the fertile haugh that gave
the place a name, and through which meandered a stream, that, though
insignificant there, widened greatly before it reached the sea.

The house of Earlshaugh is large and picturesque.  Built originally
in the days when James III. was King of the realm, and when that
ill-fated monarch granted a special license to the then Baron to
erect a fortalice, 'surrounded with walls and ditches, defended by
gates of brass or iron,' many additions had been made to it, and the
grace of a venerable antiquity was now combined with the comfort and
luxury of modern days.

The old rooms were small, panelled with pine rather than oak; and the
old shot and arrow loopholes under the windows had long since been
plugged up and plastered over.  In the olden time gardens were too
valuable to be left outside the walls of a Scottish fortalice at a
feudal neighbour's mercy, and trees only afforded cover for an
attacking foe; but now the slopes crowned by Earlshaugh sheltered a
modern garden with all its rare flowers, and the clefts of the rock
afforded nurture for numerous trees and shrubs.

Royalty had often taken its ease in Earlshaugh, and in its grounds
there is still a venerable thorn-tree in which tradition says the
hawks of the Fifth and Sixth Jameses were wont to roost; nor was the
house unknown in history and war, for there is still a room that was
occupied by Cardinal Beatoun, the stair to which had a peculiarity
after his murder, that whoever went up its steps felt as if going
down; and the western wall yet bears the marks of the cannon shot,
when it was attacked by General D'Oisel, the Comte de Martigues, and
other French chevaliers, in the wars of Mary of Guise, and when
Kirkcaldy of Grange, by one stroke of his two-handed sword, slew at
its gate the Comte de St. Pierre, Knight of St Michael.

In that old house every chamber had its story of some past occupant;
for there the Lairds of Earlshaugh were born; there they brought home
their brides, and there they had--unless they fell in battle--died
and been borne forth by their own people to Leuchars Kirk, or to the
Chapel of St. Bennet, of which no vestige now remains.

Looking over the fair and sunlit scene before him, Roland Lindsay was
thinking of all these things, while Maude drooped her pretty head on
his shoulder, and said:

'It is so terrible to suppose that we may have lost all this through
the folly--the weakness of papa.'

'In the hands of an artful Jezebel!  But who is that person riding
straight across the lawn, heedless of path or avenue?'

'Sharpe--Mr. Hawkey Sharpe,' replied Maude, starting with something
like a shudder again--an emotion which Roland fortunately did not
perceive; for with reference to this obnoxious person there was a
secret between him and her which Maude, with all her love and
affection, dared not confide to her fiery brother, lest it should
bring about the very catastrophe which she dreaded so much.




CHAPTER XIII.

ROLAND'S VEXATION.

'In my father's house on sufferance only, it would seem!' was the
half-aloud remark muttered through his teeth by Roland, when betimes
next morning he was up while the dew was glittering on shrub and
tree, to have a ramble, cigar in mouth, and feeling with bitterness
in his heart that through the fault of another, rather than himself,
he had been severely and unjustly dealt with.

When Roland joined his regiment an elder brother now dead, Harry
Lindsay of the Scots Guards, had been, like himself, somewhat
extravagant--Harry particularly so amid the facilities afforded by
London for spending freely and living fast--thus between certain
bills which the later had compelled the old gentleman to accept,
looking upon him, as he too often said, 'merely as the family
banker,' but more especially by his betting, racing, and other
proclivities peculiar to 'the Brigade,' he had so enraged the old
Laird of Earlshaugh that, acted upon by the influence of his unwise
'second election,' the latter had executed a will--the obnoxious
document so often referred to--completely in her favour, leaving her
everything, with certain arrangements--a provision--for his surviving
son Roland and his daughter Maude.

A codicil, tending to reverse or revoke this, had evidently been in
preparation, but was never fulfilled or signed.

Thus far alone Roland had been made aware, but was still inclined to
doubt the tenor of a document he had never seen, which he could not
as yet see, and the copy of which, sent to him in Egypt, had been
lost in the transmission as stated.

Moreover, he was a soldier--nothing but a soldier in many ways, and,
as he was wont to say to himself, 'an utter muff,' so far as business
matters were concerned.

Of his own dubious position at Earlshaugh and the presumption of Mr.
Hawkey Sharpe, the steward or manager of the property, he was soon to
have unpleasantly convincing proofs that sorely tested his patience
and tried his proud and impetuous temper.

A prey to somewhat chequered thoughts, he had wandered in the dewy
morning over much of the beautiful and picturesque property.  Every
lane, hedgerow, field, and farm had been familiar to him from his
boyhood, since old Johnnie Buckle, the head groom, had taught him to
take his fences, even as the old gamekeeper, Gavin Fowler, had shown
him where the best grown coveys were sure to be found.  He had seen
alterations and innovations which displeased him extremely, and had
visited some of the tenants, attended in his ramble by an old herd
who had been in the service of the Lindsays for half a century; and
he now returned by the great avenue, where still the ancient oaks,
that erewhile had heard the bugle of King James, the Scottish Haroun,
on many a hunting day, still gave forth their leaves from year to
year, and entered the cosy old-fashioned breakfast-room, where
Dresden china and glittering plate, with an array of cold meats,
fish, and fruit, suggested a hearty Scottish morning repast, and over
the carved stone fireplace of which hung a portrait of his father in
the scarlet costume of the Caledonian Hunt.  Maude was not there; but
to his indignation the room had another occupant.

'Mr. Trotter, when you have quite ended the perusal of that paper you
will, perhaps, so far favour me?'

The person he addressed with a grim but mock suavity was Tam Trotter,
who, clad in the Lindsay livery, blue and yellow, making certain of
not being disturbed, had--with all the coolness, if not the easy
elegance, of a 'Jeames' of Belgravia or Mayfair--seated himself in
the breakfast-room, and, with his slippered feet on a velvet fender
stool, and his broad back reclined in an easy-chair, was deep in the
columns of the _Fife Herald_.

He started up overwhelmed with confusion, and began in a breathless
voice to stammer an apology.

'There--there--that will do; but don't let this happen again,
Trotter,' said Roland; 'it shows that the discipline of the house
wants adjustment.  By Jove, if I had you in barracks I'd send you to
knapsack-drill for a week!'

The wretched Tam made a hasty retreat, and Maude, detecting the
situation, came in laughing merrily to get her brother's morning
kiss, and looking, he thought, so bright, so sweet, and so pretty.
'Who,' says Anthony Trollope, 'has not seen some such girl when she
has come down early, without the full completeness of her morning
toilet, and yet nicer, fresher, prettier to the eye of him who is so
favoured than she has ever been in more formal attire?'

'Covers laid for two only--thank goodness, you and I are to have our
breakfast _tête-à-tête_!' she exclaimed, as she seated herself at the
table, and the terribly 'cowed' or abashed Trotter took post behind
her.

'And then I must be off to the stables to see what cattle are there,
and renew my acquaintance with old Johnnie Buckle, who taught me how
to take my flying leaps--never to funk at a bullfinch, a sunk fence,
a mill race, or anything.  Many of Johnnie's tricks stood me in good
stead, Maude, when I was with poor Hicks and Baker in Egypt,' said
Roland.

Strolling forth in the bright morning sunshine, amid which the house
of Earlshaugh, with its massive walls of polished ashlar, its
machicolated battlement and tall, old windows, glittered in light,
with masses sunk in shadow, he was met by the head gardener, old
Willie Wardlaw, whom he remembered as a faithful servitor in years
past (and whose rarest peaches he had stolen many a time and oft),
with a hand outstretched in welcome, and his hat in the other, as he
bowed his silvery head in token of respect.

'Oh, sir, but I've been langing to see ye ere it is owre late and the
mischief done!' he exclaimed.

'What mischief?'

'The meadowing o' the park and lawn, where never a plough has been
since the King was in Falkland.'

'Who has suggested this piece of utilitarian barbarity?' asked Roland
with lowering brow.

'Wha wad it be but Mr. Hawkey Sharpe?  Pawkie-Sharpe wad be a better
name for him,' was the contemptuous response, made with evident
bitterness of heart.

'I'll see to that, Willie,' said Roland as he strode on, but soon to
be confronted by another official--a kind of forester--who had charge
of all the timber on the property.

'I hope, Captain,' said the latter, 'you're in time to save the
King's Wood, sir.'

'What do you mean?'

'Ye surely ken it is doomed--a' to the King's Thorn?'

'Doomed--how?'

'To be cut down and sold--a black, burning shame!  Some o' the aiks
are auld as the three Trees o' Dysart!'

'By whose order?' asked Roland, greatly ruffled.

'Oh, Mr. Hawkey Sharpe's, of course.'

'But why?'

'It is no for me to say, sir,' replied the old man uneasily; 'but
folk hint that when a body backs the wrong horse at races some one
maun pay the piper.  Maister Sharpe cuts gey near the wind, and comes
aftener wi' the rake than the shool; but he'll get a bite o' his ain
bridle, I hope, yet!'

'Racing, is it?  I shall see this matter attended to also.  His
presumption is unparalleled!' said Roland, as with something between
a groan and an imprecation on his lips he passed on, to look after a
mount for Annot Drummond, and to digest this new piece of
information--that the so-called steward was about to cut down one of
the oldest of the ancestral woods on the property to meet a gambling
debt!

At the stables, warm indeed was the welcome he met from the veteran
groom Johnnie, who did not seem older by a day since Roland had seen
him last--hale, hardy, and lithe, though past his sixtieth year, with
long body, short bandy legs, small, closely-shaven head, and sharp,
keen, twinkling eyes--his white tie scrupulously folded, and attired
as usual in a heavily flapped corduroy waistcoat, with large pockets,
in one of which was stuck a curry-comb, and in his hands was a steel
bridle-bit, which he was polishing with leather till it shone like
silver.

Roland Lindsay had been so long away from among his own people and
native country, that he felt the keenest pleasure at the warmth of
his reception by any of the old servants whom the new _régime_
permitted to linger about Earlshaugh.

'Eh, Captain, how like the Laird, your worthy father, you are!'
exclaimed old Johnnie Buckle, with kindly eyes, adding, 'but I hope
you'll never live to be sic a gomeral--excuse me, sir.'

Roland knew to what the old fellow referred, and was silent.

Like the old English squire of Belton, his father had been, though a
popular man with all his friends, and brother fox-hunters especially,
and a boon companion too--one that had a dignity that was his from
nature rather than effort, but was 'a man who, in fact, did little or
nothing in the world--whose life had been very useless, but who had
been gifted with such a presence that he looked as though he were one
of God's noblest creatures.  Though always dignified, he was ever
affable, and the poor liked him better than they might have done had
he passed his time in searching out their wants and supplying them.'
Though little of eleemosynary aid is ever required or looked for by
the manly, self-reliant, and independent peasantry of Scotland.

'You have some good nags here,' said Roland, as he walked through the
stables.  'I shall want two or three for the saddle in a day or two.'

The old groom shook his head and chewed a straw viciously.

'I should like a spin on this one--a pretty roan hunter.'

'Yes; he's about sixteen hands high, a bonnie wee head, full chest
and barrel, broad i' the loins, and firm of foot.'

'The very nag for me, Johnnie.'

'But you can't have him, Maister Roland,' said the groom, forgetting
the lapse of years.

'Why?'

'That is Mr. Hawkey Sharpe's favourite saddle horse.'

'Oh--indeed--this mare, then?'

'That is his hack.'

'The devil!  This roadster, then?'

'His pad; no leg must cross it but his own.  That is a nag more
difficult to find in perfection than even a hunter or roan,' said
Buckle, passing a hand admiringly over the silky flank of the animal.
'That bay cob is close on saxteen hands high, bonnie in shape, as ye
see, and high-stepping in action, gentle as a wean, and a wean might
lead it.'

'That, too, is Mr. Sharpe's, I presume!'

'Yes, sir.'

'By Jove, he is well mounted!' said Roland, in irrepressible wrath,
thinking of a certain individual 'on horse-back.'

'That pair of thirteen hands each are Miss Lindsay's.'

'Ah,' thought Roland, a little mollified, 'one of them will mount
Annot.  Mr. Sharpe dabbles a little in horse-flesh, I have heard?'

'And loses sometimes, Maister Roland.'

'How do you know?'

'By his face, for then he girns like a sheep's heid in the smith's
tangs.  He kens as little o' dogs, or he wadna gang aboot wi' a
dust-hole pointer at his heels.'

'What kind of pointer is that, Buckle?'

'A cur o' nae mair breed than himsel',' replied the old groom, who
evidently had no love for the steward.  'Hech, me!' he added under
his breath, as Roland left the stable-yard with evident disgust and
annoyance in his face and air, 'is he yet to learn that a bad
servitor never made a gude maister, and that a sinking maister mak's
a rising man?  Dule seems to hang o'er Earlshaugh!'

But more mortification awaited Roland.  He knew that there was an
infinity of matters connected with the tenants--rents, repairs,
timber, oxen, fences, and winter forage, renewal of leases, and so
forth--on which there was no appearance of him, the heir, the only
son, being consulted; and of this he soon had unpleasant proof.

'Remember what I urged, dearest Roland,' said his sister, as she
joined him at the _porte cochère_ and lifted her loving and smiling
blue eyes to his, while clasping both hands over his arm and hanging
upon him.  'Do keep your temper in any interview you may have with
this man Sharpe, who actually affects to think it a condescension to
accept his post in our household, as he has been heard to say that a
gentleman must live somehow, as well as other people do.'

'I must see him,' said Roland through his clenched teeth, as he
entered the library, where he found Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, who was
usually installed there at the same hour daily, on business matters
intent, occupying the late Laird's easy-chair, seated at his table,
which was littered with account-books, letters, and papers, while at
his back hung on the wall a full-length, by Scougal, of that Colonel
Lindsay who figured in the Legend of the Weird Yett, looking grim,
haughty, and proud, as the subjects of most old portraits do, when
every gentleman looked like a great lord.

Sharpe saw the black expression that hovered in Roland's sombre face,
and, rising, accorded him a bow, and, in deference to the presence of
Maude (and perhaps of his sister, who entered the room at the same
moment), laid aside his cigar.

'Among some letters to me this morning,' said Roland, 'is one from
old Duncan Ged, for a renewal of his lease of the Mains of Dron.'

'But I have no idea of doing so,' replied Mr. Sharpe, dipping his pen
in the ink-bottle.

'_You?_' queried Roland.

'I--I mean, that is----'

'Who or what the devil do you mean, Mr. Sharpe?' said Roland,
undeterred by the pressure of Maude's little hand on his arm.

'I mean that Mrs. Lindsay, acting on my advice, has no intention of
doing so.'

'Why?' asked Roland, dissembling his rage, to find the mask thrown
off thus.

'Because the land is worth twice as much again as it was in the days
when your grandfather gave a tack of the Mains to his grandfather.'

'Surely he deserves to benefit thereby?'

'We don't think so.'

'We again!' thought Roland, trembling with suppressed passion; but
now Trotter, the servant, announced that the gamekeeper wished to see
Mr. Sharpe, and Gavin Fowler was ushered in--an old man whose eyes,
when Roland shook hands with him, glistened with pride and pleasure,
as he exclaimed:

'Welcome back to your father's rooftree and yer ain fireside, sir; a'
here hae lang wanted ye sairly.'

A sneer hovered on the lips of Hawkey Sharpe, as he said briefly to
the keeper, who had a gun under his arm, a shot-belt over his
shoulders, and a couple of dogs at his heels:

'Well, what brings you here to-day?'

'I've caught that loon Jamie Spens snaring rabbits and hares in the
King's Wood.'

'At last,' said Hawkey Sharpe through his teeth.

'At last, sir,' responded the keeper, chiefly to Roland.

'Did he show fight?' asked Sharpe.

'Of course he did; Jamie comes o' a camstairy and fechtin' race.'

'I know that,' said Roland; 'this is not his first offence, by what
you said?'

'Allow _me_, sir,' said the steward pointedly, with a wave of his
hand.

'He is no bad kind o' chield,' urged the keeper.

'He will serve for an example, anyway!'

'His family are puir--starving, in fact, sir.'

'What the deuce do I care?  I'd as soon shoot a poacher as a weasel.'

'Let the poor fellow off for this time,' said Roland.

'Of course--do, please,' urged Maude; 'if you, Mr. Sharpe, were poor,
hungry, and, more than all, had a hungry wife and children----'

'They are nothing to me.'

'But such pretty little children!' urged Maude.

'God bless your kind heart, miss!' exclaimed the old keeper.

'Let him go--this once--I say,' said Roland, still boiling at the
tone and manner adopted by the steward.

'For my sake,' added Maude sweetly.

'For yours?' asked Mr. Sharpe, looking at her with a peculiar
expression to which Roland had not yet the key, for he said firmly
and emphatically:

'At my _order_, rather!'

'Roland, please don't interfere,' said his cold and pale-faced
stepmother; 'Mr. Sharpe knows precisely how to deal with these
people.'

'Oh--indeed!'

'I shall not take my way in this instance,' said Mr. Sharpe
condescendingly; 'and so, to please _you_, Miss Lindsay, the culprit
shall go free,' he added, with a bow to Maude, who blushed, more with
annoyance, apparently, than satisfaction, while Roland, in obedience
to an imploring glance from her, stifled his indignation, and
abruptly quitted the library.

'I thank ye for trying to help me, sir,' said old Duncan Ged, who
stood in the hall, bonnet in hand, and apparently quite crushed by
the non-renewal of his lease; 'but Hawkey Sharpe is the hardest agent
between the Forth an' Tay; he turns the puir out o' house and hame at
a minute's notice, and counts every hare and rabbit in the woods.
E'en's ye like, Mr. Sharpe!' said the old man, shaking his clenched
hand in the direction of the library door; 'ilka man buckles his belt
his ain gate, as I maun buckle mine.  Everything has an end, and a
pudding has twa.'

And thus strangely consoling himself, he took his departure.  Roland
sent the old man by post a cheque for fifty pounds; he could do no
more at that time.

'But for dear Maude's sake,' thought Roland, 'I should certainly
never set foot in Earlshaugh till these matters of mine are cleared
up--and perhaps never again!  But I'll make no fracas till after the
covert shooting is over and our guests are gone; _then_, by Jove;
won't I bring Mr. Hawkey Sharpe and this grim stepmother to book, if
I can!'




CHAPTER XIV.

MAUDE'S SECRET.

Roland had got a suitable mount from old Buckle and gone for 'a
spin,' to leave, if possible, his worries and fidgets behind him,
away by Radernie and as far as Carnbee, where the green hills that
culminate in conical Kellie Law look down on the Firth of Forth and
the dark blue German Sea; while Maude--after being down at Spens the
poacher's cottage with money and sundry comforts for his starving
wife and children--full of the subject of Roland's return and the
approaching visit of her _fiancé_, Jack Elliot, had written a long,
effusive, and young girl-like epistle to the latter, and was on her
way to slip it into the locked letter-bag in the hall with her own
hand.  She had a consciousness that she was watched, and with it no
desire that her correspondence should be discussed just then, as she
had a nervous dread of Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, who had actually and
presumptuously ventured on more than one occasion to evince some
unmistakable tenderness towards her--an indiscretion, to say the
least of it, of which she dared give no hint to her fiery brother;
but which was the source of much disquietude to poor Maude, and of
confusion and distress to her, as regarded the steward's power in the
house, and made her change colour at the mere mention of his name.

And now when passing through a long and lonely wainscotted corridor,
the windows of which on one side overlooked the haugh beneath the
house, and which led to the great staircase, she came suddenly upon
the very object of her dread, Mr. Sharpe, and hastily thrust her
letter into the bosom of her dress.

Though her own mistress, with her engagement to Captain Elliot
acknowledged and accepted by her brother, Maude, from the influence
of circumstances, was--as stated--actually afraid lest this daring
admirer should discover that she was writing to Elliot, so much did
she dread the power of Sharpe and his sister, and their capacity for
working mischief.

Some vague sense, or doubt, of his security in the future, and of his
sister's continued favour to himself, made Mr. Sharpe thus raise his
bold eyes to the daughter of the house, aware that she was almost
unprotected; her maternal uncle, Sir Harry, was an old and well-nigh
helpless man, and her brother had yet to run the risks of war in that
land now deemed the grave of armies--the Soudan.

Apart from her beauty of mind and person--not that Mr. Hawkey Sharpe
cared much about the former or was influenced thereby--the latter
certainly allured him, and the helplessness referred to encouraged
him in his pretensions, even when he began to suspect that there was
another in the field, though he knew not yet precisely who that other
was.

Mr. Sharpe's antecedents were not brilliant.  He had begun life in a
solicitor's office in Glasgow, but had learned more than law
elsewhere; book-making, betting, the race-course, and billiards had
brought him in contact with his betters in rank but equals in
mischief and roguery, and from them he had acquired a certain
factitious polish of manner, which he hoped now to turn to good
account.

Maude Lindsay knew and believed in that which Roland struggled
against knowing and believing, the precise tenor of their father's
will; and in terror of precipitating matters with Sharpe and his
sister, she had been compelled to temporize and submit to the more
than effusive politeness of the former, whose bearing, however, she
could not mistake.

In nothing, as yet, had he gone beyond those--in him, somewhat
clumsy--tendernesses of incipient love-making, which might, or might
not, mean anything, though Maude felt that they meant too much; and
she never forgot the shock, the start, the humiliating conviction
that she experienced when the necessity of regarding him as a lover
was forced by necessity upon her.

Her disdain she utterly failed, at first, to conceal; but Hawkey
Sharpe, whose reading had taught him, through the perusal of many low
and exciting love stories, that a girl might be won in spite of her
teeth, was resolved to persevere.

'Good-evening, Mr. Sharpe--what a start you gave me!' said Maude,
essaying to pass him in the narrow corridor; but he contrived to bar
her way.

'Pardon me for a moment,' said he submissively enough; 'I wish you
would not call me Mr. Sharpe; and oh, more than all, that you would
permit me to--to call you Maude!'

The latter's eyes flashed fire, soft and blue though they were.
There was no mistaking the tenor of this mode of address.  Hawkey
Sharpe seemed to have opened the trenches at last, and Maude's first
thought was:

'Has he been imbibing too much?'

'It was for your sake I let off that poacher Spens this morning,'
said he in a slightly reproachful tone.

'For the sake of his wife and children, I hope, rather.'

'Oh, bother his wife and brats! what are they to me compared with the
satisfaction of pleasing you?'

'Mr. Sharpe!' said Maude, drawing back a pace, and, in spite of
herself, cresting up her proud little head.

'It seems so hard,' said he, affecting an air of humility, and
casting down his eyes for a moment, 'that there should be such a gulf
apparently between us, Miss Lindsay.'

'A gulf,' repeated Maude, not precisely knowing what to say.

'Yes--and you deepen it.  If I attempt to speak to you even as a
friend, you recoil from me; and in this huge, sequestered house, it
seems natural that we should at least be friends.'

'If we are enemies, I know it not, Mr. Sharpe,' said Maude with some
hesitation, and then attempting to cover the latter by a smile, as
she knew the necessity--a knowledge which distressed and disgusted
her--of temporizing, which seemed, even if for a moment, a species of
treason to Jack Elliot.

On the other hand, inclination and calculations as to the future,
made Sharpe admire Maude very much, and perhaps he was in love with
her as much as it was in his nature to be in love with anyone beyond
himself.  Rejected, or even scorned, he was not a man to break his
heart for any woman in the land, though it might become inspired by
hatred and a longing for revenge.  Yet he was prepared to make 'a
bold stroke for a wife' in Maude's instance.  If refused once he
would try again, and even perhaps a third or a fourth time, and feel
only an emotion of rage on his final rejection--so in reality heart
was not so much the affair with him.

Maude attempted to pass him, but he still barred her way, and even
sought, without success, to capture one of her hands.

'Open confession is good for the soul,' he resumed, in a blunt and
blundering way, 'and avowals come to one's lips at times, and cannot
be restrained.  I have played too long with fire, or with edged
tools.  You must know, Miss Lindsay, that no man could be in your
society much without admiring you, and admiration is but a prelude
to--love.'

Fear of him, and all a quarrel with him might involve, repressed the
girl's desire to laugh at this inflated little speech; but he--with
all his constitutional impudence--quailed for a moment under the
expression that flashed in her eyes--blue, and usually soft and sunny
though they were--while she remained silent and thinking:

'What on earth will he say next?'

'Do you not understand me, Miss Lindsay?' he asked, perceiving a look
of wonder gathering in her face.  'Do you not know that I love you?'
he added, lowering his voice, while glancing round with quick and
stealthy eyes.

'Mr. Sharpe,' said Maude, trembling, yet rising to the occasion, 'I
understand what you say; but I hope you are not serious, and not
insulting me.'

'Is the emotion with which you have inspired me likely to be mingled
with jest, or with insult to you?'

'Oh, this is too much!' said Maude, interlacing her fingers, with
difficulty restraining tears of anger and resentment, while, with a
keen sense of future danger and his presumption, she felt as if there
was something unreal and grotesque in the situation.  Moreover, she
was anxious to get her letter into the house postal bag ere the
latter was taken away.

'I am deeply earnest, Miss Lindsay,' resumed Sharpe, still with great
humility of tone and manner.  'My regard for you is no passing fancy.
I learned to love you from the first moment I saw you.'

'Mr. Sharpe,' said Maude, gathering courage from desperation, 'I do
not understand why you venture to talk in this style to me!
Encouragement I have never given you, even by a glance.'

'Too well do I know that,' said he, affecting a mournful tone; 'but I
hope to lead you to--to like me a little in return.'

'I don't dislike you,' said Maude, again seeking to temporize.

'And, if possible, to love me--as a man--one to whom you can entrust
a future you cannot see--one whom you will one day call husband.'

He drew nearer as his voice became lower and more earnest, and Maude
recoiled hastily in growing dismay, and the words 'a future you
cannot see' stung her deeply.

Too well did she know that all this bold love-making was born of the
humbled, fallen, and peculiar nature of her position under her
ancestral rooftree, and of the ruin of her family--a ruin on which
this man was rising under his sister's wing!

'I beseech you, Mr. Sharpe,' said she, 'to say no more on this
subject, for more than the merest friendship there can never be
between us.'

'Have you thought it over?'

'Certainly not!'

His face clouded, and his usually bold, observant, and keen gray eyes
became inflamed with growing anger.

'Seriously--deliberately you refuse to accord me the slightest hope?'

'Yes.'

'You think by this bearing to humiliate me as much as a proud girl
can do?'

'You pain me now by speaking thus,' she responded more gently.

'And you ruin my life!'

'I think not,' said Maude, with a little curl on her lovely lip.

'And may make that ruin a subject of jest to your brother's fine
friends who are coming here in a few days--a few hours, rather, now.'

At this coarse remark Maude accorded him an inquiring stare.

'Oh, I know what young girls are,' he resumed in a half-savage,
half-sullen manner.  'A rejection like mine is just the sort of thing
they like to boast of.'

'You thus add insult to your profound presumption!' exclaimed Maude,
quite exasperated now by the under-breeding of the style he adopted
so suddenly; and, sweeping past him, she reached the entrance-hall,
where the postal bag lay--a square and stately place, the stone floor
of which was covered with soft matting; where in winter a great fire
always blazed in the spacious stone fireplace, over which hung a
single suit of armour, amid a trophy of weapons, old swords, mauls,
and pikes.

She put her hand in her bosom--her letter--the letter she wished to
dispose of with her own hand--was no longer there!  How--where had
she dropped it?  She turned, looked hastily round her, and saw Mr.
Hawkey Sharpe, who had evidently picked it up, descending the
staircase, and he handed it to her with a slight and grave bow.

'Oh--thank you,' said Maude, her mind now full of confusion and
vexation.

Quick as thought she dropped it into the postal bag after he handed
it to her, but not before he had seen the address, and a dangerous
gleam shot athwart his shifty eyes, and again the coarse, bold nature
of the man came forth.

'So--so,' said he, through his clenched teeth.  'I find I have been
mistaken in you, Miss Lindsay.'

'Mistaken, Mr. Sharpe?'

'Yes--mistaken all along.'

'I do not comprehend you.'

'Deceived by your soft, fair face and gentle eyes, I thought you
unlike other girls--no coquette--no flirt--and now--now, I find----'

'What, sir?' demanded Maude impetuously.

'That you have correspondents.'

'Few, I suppose, are without them.'

'But who is he to whom you openly write--this Captain John Elliot?'

'Intolerable!  How dare you ask me?' demanded Maude, her breast
swelling, her cheeks, not flushed, but pale with anger, and her eyes
flashing.

'A military friend of your brother's, I suppose we shall call him,'
said he with an undisguised sneer.

'And a dear friend of mine,' said Maude defiantly, exasperated to
find that the very discovery she wished to avoid had been made, and
by this person particularly; 'but here comes my brother, and perhaps
you had better make your inquiries of him,' she added, as a great
sigh of mingled anger and relief escaped her on hearing Roland
dismount under the _porte-cochère_; but, unable to face even him,
distressed, humiliated, and altogether unnerved by her recent
interview, all it involved, and all she had undergone, poor little
Maude rushed away to seek alleviation amid a passion of tears, unseen
and in the solitude of her own room.

So this was Maude's secret!

Hawkey Sharpe cared not just then to face Roland Lindsay; but with
hands clenched he sent a glance of hate after the retreating figure
of Maude, and withdrew in haste.

They met in future, as we shall show, even amid Roland's guests; but
with a consciousness--a most humiliating and irritating one to Maude,
that there was almost a secret understanding--that odious love-making
between them--and known, as she thought, to themselves alone.




CHAPTER XV.

MR. HAWKEY SHARPE SEEKS COUNSEL.

We have said that Maude thought that Mr. Hawkey Sharpe's love-making,
with all its euphonious platitudes, was known to him and to herself
alone.

In this she was mistaken, as Hawkey's sister Deborah, Mrs. Lindsay,
was in his confidence in that matter, and quite _au fait_ of its
doubtful progress.  She did not appear at dinner that evening, but
dined in her own room, and then betook her to her brother's sanctum,
or 'den,' as he called it--a picturesque old panelled apartment, in
what was named the Beatoun wing--which had a quaint stone fireplace,
the grate of which was full of August flowers then, but at the hearth
of which in the winter of the year before Pinkeyfield was fought, his
Eminence had been wont to toast his scarlet-slippered toes.

The furniture was quite modern.  Fishing and shooting gear, with
whips, spurs, billiard cues, a few soiled books on farriery and
racing, were its chief features now; while sporting calendars, etc.,
strewed the table, with a few note and account books, and letters of
minor importance.

After gloomily referring to his late interview with Maude Lindsay, he
assisted himself to a briar-root pipe from a nice arrangement of
meerschaums and other pipes stuck in an oaken and steel mounted
horseshoe on the broad mantel-shelf, and prepared to soothe himself
with 'a weed' and the contents of a remarkably long tumbler--brandy
and soda--sent up, per Mr. Trotter, from the pantry of old Funnell,
the butler, for his delectation; while his pale and sallow-visaged
sister was content to sip from a slender glass a decoction of some
medical stuff prescribed for chronic low spirits and weak action of
the heart--an affliction under which she laboured, and to which, no
doubt, her pallid and at times stone-coloured complexion was
attributable.

Always calm in demeanour, she was otherwise unlike her brother
Hawkey, who was not particular to a shade in anything (provided he
was not found out), and she was outwardly a model of religion and
propriety, blended with hypocrisy, which--according to
Rochefoucauld--is the homage that vice pays to virtue.

Attired in a luxurious dressing-gown and tasselled smoking cap, Mr.
Sharpe lounged in a cosy easy-chair, shooting his huge cuffs forward
from time to time, and stroking his sandy, ragged moustache, in what
he thought to be 'good style.'

Instead of being thick and podgy, as his humble origin might suggest,
his hands, we must admit, were rather thin, with long spiky filbert
nails, reminding one--with all their cultivated whiteness--of the
talons of a bird of prey.

'Deuced good thing for us, Deb, that codicil was never completed,'
said he (for about the hundredth time), breaking a pause; 'but still
we have now that fellow, Roland Lindsay, back again, ready to
overhaul matters, after escaping Arab bullets and swords, desert
fever, and the devil only knows what more.'

'You forget that this is his home,' said she, with a little touch of
womanly feeling for the moment, 'or he deems it as such.'

'So long as you permit it, I suppose.'

'I cannot throw down the glove to the County just now.'

'But assume a virtue if you have it not,' said Hawkey, applying
himself to the long tumbler, that still sparkled and effervesced in
the lamp-light.

'He cannot harm me, at all events.'

'I don't know that, and I was deuced easier when he was away in
Egypt.  Some might call this selfish--what the devil do I care!  A
man's chief duty centres on himself.'

'Without pity for the unfortunate?'

'Don't be a humbug, Deb, and don't act to me!  The poor and
unfortunate are so, by their own fault, I suppose.  I wish to speak
with you about that to which I have--reluctantly--referred more than
once.'

Mrs. Lindsay made a gesture of impatience, and said, while toying
with her pet cur Fifine:

'Ah--money matters with reference to yourself in the future?'

'Yes; but I do dislike, my dear Deb,' said he, with an affection
which she knew right well was mostly simulated, 'discussing them with
you.'

'Why?'

'It is so disagreeable.'

'It would be more disagreeable for you if there were no money matters
to discuss,' she replied with the smallest approach to a sneer.
'But, to the point, Hawkey--I know what it is!'

'You are not strong, you know, dear Deb; you may go off--' (the
hooks, he was about to say, but changed his mind)--'off suddenly, and
not leave your house well ordered.  We should always be prepared for
the worst.  You know what the best doctors in Edinburgh have told
you,' he added, burying his nose and moustache in the tumbler again.

'Well?' said she.

'I mean that you should execute that will you spoke of.'

'In your favour?'

'And so preclude all contention from any quarter--a hundred times I
have hinted this to you.'

'How kind and soothing the reminder is!' she replied bitterly,
unwilling, like all selfish people, to adopt or face the dire idea of
death, sudden or otherwise.

'I do advise you to consider well, Deb.'

'For your sake, of course.'

'Well--it may seem selfish, dear Deb.'

'Ah--advice is a commodity which every possessor deems most valuable,
and yet hastens to get rid of.'

Hawkey eyed her anxiously, for her irritation and animosity, when her
delicate health and disease of the heart were referred to, always
predominated over every other feeling, but she waived them for the
time and returned to the first subject.

'So that was all your success with Maude?'

'Not much, certainly,' he replied, with a scowl at vacancy.

'Unfortunate!'

'Rather!'

'As the provision left by her father is a most ample one for her.'

'Not so ample as all Earlshaugh, however,' thought he, refilling his
briar-root in silence.

'You must persevere.  It has been truly said that "the days of Jacob
are over, that men don't understand waiting now, and it is always as
well to catch your fish when you can."'

Hawkey smoked on in silence.  He had never before dared to lift his
eyes so high, never before ventured to 'make love' to a lady.  His
past experience had been more sudden, abrupt, less bothersome, and
more acceptable.  Had he done or said too much, or too little?  Ought
he to have gone down on his knees like the lovers he had seen on the
stage, or read of in old story books?

No--he was certain she would have laughed at him had he done so; and
he was also certain no one 'did that sort of thing' nowadays.  The
age of such supplication was assuredly past; and he thought,
viciously too, that he had 'done all that may become a man.'

'These bloated aristocrats, Deb, have a way all their own, of setting
a fellow down!' said he, with a louring expression in his shifty,
pale-gray eyes; 'she is, I know, my superior in position, in the way
the world goes, _as yet_,' he continued, for Mr. Hawkey Sharpe,
though longing for the vineyard of Naboth, was--at heart--a
Social-Democrat; 'my superior in birth, education, and habits.'

'I should think so.'

'Don't sneer at me, Deb.'

'So far, perhaps, as Maude is concerned, your success depends,
Hawkey, upon whether there is anyone else in her thoughts.'

'Before me, you mean?'

'Yes--she may be engaged for all we know.  I, for one, am certainly
not in her confidence.  She has a lover, however, I suspect.'

'It looks deuced like the case.  I saw her post a letter to a fellow
named Elliot to-night,' he added, with a knit in his brow and an ugly
gleam in his pale eyes.

'Elliot--that is the name of one of those who come here to shoot, for
the First.'

'To shoot?'

'Yes--on Roland's invitation.'

'There may be something else shot than partridges.'

'Elliot--Captain Elliot?'

'Yes--that was the name on her letter.'

'Well--you must not quarrel with him--that would be unseemly.'

'My dear Deb, I never _quarrel_ with those I _hate_,'  was the
comprehensive and sinister reply of Hawkey Sharpe, with his most
diabolical expression; 'and though I have never seen this interloper
Elliot, I feel a most ungodly hatred of him already.'

'I repeat that no good can come of a vulgar quarrel, and that you
must not forget the proprieties.  What would the servants alone say
or think?'

'Oh, d--n the servants!' responded her brother, tugging his moustache
angrily; 'but if that fellow Elliot is her lover, I must put my
brains in steep and contrive to separate them at all hazards, Deb.
If I allow him or anyone else to enter the stakes, I shall be out of
the running.  Anyhow, as you are looking pale, Deb, I mustn't keep
you here talking over my incipient love affairs, or you will not be
able to receive some of these infernal guests, who, I believe, come
to-morrow.  You are not overburdened with visitors, however.'

'Yet I would rather it was the time of their going than their
coming,' said Mrs. Lindsay, whom his remark touched on a tender point.

'Why?' asked Hawkey.

'They must soon perceive that I am tabooed by the county
families--that no one calls here as of old.'

'Well?'

'Except, perhaps, the people from the Manse and the doctor.'

'Neither--or none--of whom I care to see.'

'And yet I subscribe to all local charities, bazaars, school feasts,
as regularly----'

'As if you were an Elder of the Kirk--thereby wasting your money to
win a place among the "unco guid," and all to no purpose,' said
Hawkey, with the slightest approach to derision.  'Well--well; how I
shall succeed with the fair Maude--if I succeed at all--time and a
little management, in more ways than one, will show,' he added with
knitted brows and hands clenched by thoughts that were full of vague
but savage intentions.

'You know the proverb,' said Mrs. Lindsay, with a cold smile, as she
lifted up her dog and retired: 'a man may woo as he will, but maun
wed where his weird is.'

Hawkey Sharpe set his teeth, and his eyes gleamed as he thought
with--but did not quote--Georges Ohnet, because he knew him not:
'Money is the password of these venal and avaricious times.  Beauty,
virtue, and intelligence count for nothing.  People no longer say,
"Room for the worthiest," but "Room for the wealthiest!"'

Then other things occurred to him.

'I am certain that Maude' (he spoke of her as 'Maude' to himself and
his sister) 'won't mention our little matter, for cogent reasons, to
her brother,' he reflected confidently;.  'but I must work the oracle
with Deb about her will.  With that heart ailment which she
undoubtedly has, she may go off the hooks at any moment, as I,
perhaps unwisely, hinted; and I am not lawyer enough to know how old
Earlshaugh's last testament may stand; yet, surely, I am Deb's
heir-at-law, anyhow, I should think!'

Unless Mr. Hawkey Sharpe had indulged--which was not improbable--in
'tall talk,' his language and disposition augured ill for the safety
and comfort of Maude's _fiancé_ if he came to Earlshaugh; but
Sharpe's threatened vengeance had no decided plan as yet.




CHAPTER XVI.

'FOOL'S PARADISE.'

The earliest of the guests so roughly referred to by Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe, as stated in the preceding chapter, duly arrived in the noon
of the following day, and were closely reconnoitred by that personage
through a field-glass from an angle of the bartizan, and he was
enabled to perceive that there were only two young ladies--a tall,
dark-haired one, and another less in stature, very _petite_ indeed,
with a small, flower-like face and golden hair; for they were simply
the somewhat reluctant Hester Maule and the irrepressible Annot
Drummond, for whose accommodation Mrs. Drugget, the housekeeper, had
made all the necessary preparations.

'Welcome to Earlshaugh--you are no stranger here, Hester!' said
Roland, as he kissed the latter when he assisted her to alight from
the carriage at the _porte-cochère_--the lightest and fleetest thing
possible in the way of a salute--one without warmth or lingering
force; but then Annot--whom he did not kiss at all 'before folk'--had
her hazel-green eyes upon them.

For Annot he had the most choice little bouquet that old Willie
Wardlaw, the gardener, could prepare; but there was none for Hester,
an omission which the latter scarcely noticed.

'And this is your home!' exclaimed Annot, burying her little nose
among the many lilies of the valley, pink rosebuds, and fragrant
stephanotis.

'It is the home of my forefathers,' replied Roland almost evasively,
as he gave her his arm.

'What a romantic reply--savours quite of a three-volume novel!'
exclaimed Annot, unaware of what the answer too literally implied,
and what was actually passing in Roland's mind; but Hester felt for
him, and saw the painful blush that crossed his nut-brown cheek.

The family legal agent had not yet returned to Edinburgh, so Roland
had not been able to see or take counsel with him as to what
transpired when he was lurking in the desert after Kashgate.

But Annot was come, and for the time he was content to live at
Earlshaugh in that species of Fool's Paradise--'to few unknown,' as
Milton has it.  As yet nothing more had been heard of the meadowing
of the park or cutting down the King's Wood; and save that Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe from time to time crossed his path, and even--to Maude's
intense annoyance, and that of Roland from other causes--joined his
sister at the family meals, Roland had no other specific grievance;
but he felt as if upon a volcano.

As Annot left the carriage, she was greeted warmly and kindly by
Maude, who was glad to return attentions received in London, and who
as yet knew nothing of how the young lady was situated with regard to
Roland, who now looked round for Mrs. Lindsay as the lady of the
house.

But the latter, under the _régime_ of her predecessor, his mother,
'was too accurately acquainted with the weights and measures of
society for such a movement as that;' and thus received her two
guests--or Maude's rather--in the Red Drawing-room, accurately
attired in rich black moire, with lace lappets and jet ornaments; and
was, of course, 'delighted' to see both, while according to each, not
her hand, but a finger thereof; and Hester, who knew her well of old,
read again in her pale face that mixture of hardness and cunning with
which the slight smile on her thin lips--a smile that never reached
her sharp gray eyes--well accorded.

Her eyes were handsome, and had been pleasing in their expression
once; but now her somewhat false position in Earlshaugh and her
secret ailment had imparted to them a defiant, restless, and peculiar
one.

The coldness of her manner struck Hester as unpleasant; Roland's
politeness was not warmth that made up for it, and the girl already
began to think--'I was a fool--a weak fool to come!  But how to get
away, now that I am here?'

'It is a beautiful place!' thought the artful and ambitious little
Annot, when left for a few minutes in the solitude of her own room,
and, forgetting even to glance at her soft face and _petite_ figure
in the tall cheval glass or toilette mirror, gazed dreamily from the
windows, arched and deep in the massive wall, over the far extent of
pastoral country, tufted here and there with dark green woods, with a
glimpse of the German Sea in the distance; and she felt, for a time,
all the anticipative joy of being the mistress--the joint owner--of
such a stately old pile as Earlshaugh with all its surroundings, the
historic interest of which was to her, however, a sealed book; but
there is much in the glory of a sense of ownership, says a
writer--'of the ownership of land and houses, of beeves and woolly
flocks, of wide fields and thick growing woods, even when that
ownership is of late date, when it conveys to the owner nothing but
the realization of a property on the soil; but there is much more in
it when it contains the memories of old years; when the glory is the
glory of a race as well as the glory of power and property.'

And though to a little town-bred bird like Annot such historic
flights were empty things, the old walls of Earlshaugh had seen
ancestors of Roland ride forth heading their followers with morion,
jack, and spear, to the fields of Flodden, Pinkey, and Dunbar; to the
muster place of the Fife lairds, in the year of Sherriffmuir, and to
many a stirring broil in the days when the Scotsman's sword was
always in his hand and never in its scabbard; but from such daydreams
as did occur to her, Annot was now roused by the welcome sound of the
luncheon gong echoing from the entrance-hall, and, dispensing with
the assistance of a maid, she hurried at once downstairs.

In expectation of the gentlemen who were coming after the birds on
the First, a day or two passed off delightfully enough, amid the
novelty of Earlshaugh, and the evenings were devoted to music; and
despite the unwelcome presence of the cold, haughty, and somewhat
repellant Mrs. Lindsay, Annot, as at Merlwood, talked to Roland,
played for, sang to Roland, and put forth--more effusively than
ever--all her little arts in the way of attraction for him, and him
alone; which his sister Maude, to whom this style of thing was rather
new, looked on with amused surprise at first, and then somewhat
reprehensively and gloomily.

To Hester, Roland, acting as host, was elaborate in his brotherly
kindness and attention; perhaps--nay doubtless--a lingering sentiment
of remorse had made him so; and she received it all, but with secret
pain and intense mortification, and Maude's soft blue eyes were not
slow to detect this.

'Hester,' said Maude, with arms affectionately twined round her, 'I
used to think that you and Roland were very fond of each other!'

'So we were,' said Hester in a low voice.

'Were?'

'Are, I mean--very fond of each other.  Why should we be otherwise?'
stammered poor Hester, turning away for a moment.

'I mean--I thought (uncle Harry used to quiz you both so much!) he
cared for you, and you for him more--more----'

'Than cousins usually do?'

'Yes.'

'Oh, no--no--you mistake, dear Maude.'

'Well--it seems Annot now; and yet I hope--ah, no--it cannot be.'

One fact soon became too apparent to Roland Lindsay: that his sister
Maude did not like Annot Drummond now, if she ever did.

'I never saw a girl so changed since we were at school together at
Madame Raffineur's in Belgium--even since I saw her last in London!'
said Maude; 'why, Roland, she has become quite an artful little woman
of the world!'

'Artful--oh, Maude!' he expostulated.

'Girls in their confidential moods say and admit many things their
best friends know nothing of; but don't let me vex you, dear Roland.
However, I don't like to hear Annot boast of enjoying cigarettes and
being a good shot.'

'All talk, Maude; she takes a waggish delight in startling you
country folks.  I'd stake a round sum on it, she never tried either,'
he replied, with undisguised irritation.

Maude was silent for a moment; but she would have been more than
blind had she not seen how Annot and her brother were affected to
each other, and she disliked it.

'You love Annot then?' she asked.

'I do.'

'And mean to--to marry her?'

'I hope so.'

'With Annot you have not a sentiment in common; and marriage between
two persons whose tastes are diverse is a great error.'

'If our tastes are so; but surely we know our own minds, little one,
quite as much as you and Jack Elliot of ours do.'

'There now--you are angry with me!' said Maude, with a pout on her
lip.

'Angry--not at all, Maude; who could be angry with you?  But I am
disappointed a little.'

'And so am I--not a little, but very much.'

'How?'

'I always thought you were attached to our sweet and earnest-eyed
Hester.'

'And so I am,' replied Roland, selecting a cigar with great apparent
care; 'but, as a cousin, you know.'

'And now it seems to be Annot!' said Maude, with her white hands
folded on her knee and looking up at him with an air of annoyance.

'Beyond my admissions just made, what led you to think so?'

'A thousand things!  I am not blind, nor is anyone else.  According
to what you have said, then you must be engaged!'

'Well--yes.'

'And you keep it a secret?'

'Yes.'

'But why?'

'Surely, Maude, that should be obvious to you.  Till I can see old
Mr. MacWadsett and have certain matters cleared up.'

'You are wise.  But Annot, does she, too, wish the engagement kept
secret?'

'Decidedly, from the world at least,'

'A comprehensive word; but why?'

'I have a little tour in Egypt before me yet.'

'My poor Roland!  But to me it seems that when a couple are engaged
there is no reason why all the world need not know of it, unless
there are impediments.'

'Which certainly exist so far in our case.  I am the heir of
Earlshaugh, yet is Earlshaugh mine?  At the present moment,' he
added, with his teeth almost set in anger, 'congratulations might be
embarrassing.'

Maude sighed for her brother's future, but not for her own.  That
seemed assured.  She thought that if the fashion of congratulations
prevented promises of marriage being lightly given, they served a
purpose that was good.  She had read that a girl might say yes 'when
asked to marry, with the mental reservation that if anything better
came along she will continue not to keep her word and think twice
about it if she has to go through such a form' (and such a girl she
shrewdly suspected Annot to be).  Maude also thought that marriage
engagements are frequently too lightly entered into and too lightly
set aside, and that the contract should be as sacred as marriage
itself.

'You surely know Annot well?' said Roland, breaking a silence that
embarrassed him.

'Oh yes,' replied Maude, without looking up.

'I think you will learn to like, nay, must like her!' he urged.

'I shall try, Roland,' was the dubious response, with which he was
obliged to content himself as with other things in his then Fool's
Paradise.




CHAPTER XVII.

AT EARLSHAUGH.

For two or three days before the all-important First of September,
Roland, the old gamekeeper, Gavin Fowler, young Malcolm Skene, and
even the pardoned poacher Jamie Spens, had all been busy in a vivid
and anxious spirit of anticipation as the day approached.  Many a
time had they reconnoitered by the King's Wood, the Mains of Dron, in
the Fairy Den, and elsewhere, till they knew every rood of
ground--ground over which Roland's father had last rambled on his old
shooting pony--by stubble field, hedgerow, and scroggy upland slope,
where the coveys of the neighbourhood lay, and knew almost the number
of birds in every covey; and many a time and oft the route of the
first day was planned, schemed out, and enjoyed in imagination; while
the dogs were carefully seen to in their kennels, and the guns and
ammunition inspected in the gunroom, as if a day of battle were at
hand.

Yet, even in the Lowlands of Scotland, the palmy days of shooting are
gone in many places never to return.  Muirland after muirland has
been enclosed, marshes reclaimed, and in other parts the hill slopes,
that were lonely, stern, and wild--often all but inaccessible--have
now become the sites of villas, mansions, and new-made railway
villages, till people sometimes may wonder what Cowper meant in his
'Task' when he wrote--

  'God made the country, and man made the town!'

But much of this applies more to England than to the sister kingdom.

The last evening of August saw a gay dinner party in the stately old
dining-hall of Earlshaugh, with Roland acting as host, and Mrs.
Lindsay, pale and composed as usual, but brilliant in his mother's
suite of diamonds (heir-looms of the line), too brilliant, he
thought, for the occasion, at the head of the table.

Among other friends who had come for the morrow's shooting were Jack
Elliot and Malcolm Skene, both most prepossessing-looking young
fellows; and the style and bearing of both--but especially of the
former, who had about him that finishing touch which the service,
foreign travel, and good society impart--inspired the heart of Mr.
Hawkey Sharpe with much jealous rancour and envy, and with something
of mortification too.

It may be superfluous to say that in all the elements that make a
perfect gentleman, and one accustomed to the world, he far outshone
the unfortunate Hawkey; and as he sat there, clad in evening costume,
toying with his wine-glass, and conversing in a pleasantly modulated
voice with Annot Drummond, who affected to be deeply interested in
Cairo and Alexandria, Tel-el-Kebir and Kassassin, he had no more
consciousness or idea of finding a rival in such a person than in old
Gavin Fowler, the keeper, or Funnell, the butler, who officiated
behind his chair.

But Deborah--Mrs. Lindsay--was observing Elliot, and thought of her
brother's jealousy, his ambition and avarice, and his recent threats
with secret dread and misgivings, and, knowing of what he was
capable, she glanced at him uneasily from time to time as he sat
silent, almost sullen, and imbibing more wine than was quite good for
him.

The appurtenances of the table, especially so far as plate went, were
all that might be expected in a house of such a style and age as
Earlshaugh, and the great chandelier that hung in the dome-shaped
roof with its profusely parqueted ceiling, shed a soft light over
all--on many a stately but dim portrait on the walls--among others,
one of the Lindsay of the Weird Yett, above the stone mantelpiece, on
which was carved the _fesse-chequy_ of Lindsay, crested by a tent,
with stars overhead, and the motto, _Astra castra, numen lumen_.

In the centre of the board towered a giant silver épergne (the gift
of the Hunt to the late laird) laden with fruit and flowers, a
tableau representing the gallant King James V., the 'Commons King,'
slaying a stag at bay in Falkland Wood.

Several attractive girls were present, but none perhaps were more so
in their different degree than Maude, with her sunny hair and winning
blue eyes; Hester, with her pure complexion, soft bearing, and rich
dark-brown braids; and Annot, with her flower-like face, childish
playfulness of manner, and glorious wealth of shining golden tresses.

Nearly all at the table were young, and the dinner was a happy and
joyous one, save perhaps to Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, who felt himself, with
all his profound assurance, somewhat _de trop_, though he deemed
himself, as he was, certainly 'got up as well as any fellow there.'

He was as vain of the form and whiteness of his hands as ever Lord
Byron was, and he was wont to hold forth his right one, clenching a
cambric handkerchief, with a brilliant sparkling ring of unusual
size.  His tie was faultless, his eyeglass arrogant and offensive,
especially to Elliot, after a time; his would-be general air of
stiffness and languid exclusiveness (imitated ill from others) sat as
grotesquely on him as his habit of leaving remarks unanswered, while
to all appearance critically examining the condition of his spiky
finger-nails.

His presence on this particular occasion, though under the auspices
of his sister, at first roused Roland's anger to fever heat, and the
latter took his seat at table with a very black expression in his
handsome face indeed; but he saw or felt the necessity for
dissembling, and ignored his existence.  Then after a time, affected
by the geniality of his surroundings, by the bright, pleasant faces
of his friends, the conversation, and the circulation of Mr.
Funnell's good wines--more than all, by the presence of such a sunny
little creature as Annot, who had been consigned to the care of Jack
Elliot--he completely thawed, and acted the host to perfection.

At his back stood old Funnell, his rubicund visage shining like a
harvest moon, radiant to see Roland in his father's chair and place
at the foot of the table, even though she, Mrs. Lindsay (_née_
Deborah Sharpe), was at the head thereof, though 'not Falkland bred,'
an old and unforgotten Fife saying of the days of the princely
James's which conveys much there with reference to birth and breeding.

So Roland tried to forget--perhaps for the time actually forgot--the
probable or inevitable future, and strove to be genial with her,
though it was quite beyond him to be so with her cub of a brother;
and, indeed, he never stooped to address him at all.

From the opposite side of the table Elliot silently enjoyed the
luxury of admiring his merry-eyed and bright-haired Maude, and all
the natural grace of her actions; but Hawkey Sharpe was seated
directly opposite to her too; yet her manner betrayed--even to his
keen and observant eyes--none of the annoyance or constant confusion
which might have shown itself as regarded _him_ and a recent episode,
as she entirely ignored his existence, while the presence of Jack
shed an ægis over her.

After the ladies withdrew, in obedience to a silent sign from Mrs.
Lindsay, the conversation of the gentlemen, as they closed up towards
Roland's chair, developed some unpleasant features; for Hawkey
Sharpe, whose tongue was loosened and his constitutional impudence
encouraged by Funnell's excellent Pomery-greno, evinced an unpleasant
disposition to cavil at and contradict whatever Elliot advanced or
mentioned--rather a risky proceeding on the part of Mr. Sharpe, as
Elliot was what has been described as a 'stand-offish sort of man,
with whom one would not care to joke on an early acquaintance, or
slap on the back and call 'old fellow,' or abbreviate his Christian
name;' so, when the different breeds of sporting dogs and new
fire-arms were under discussion, the steward said abruptly:

'Guns--oh, talking of guns, there is nothing I know for sport like
that with the new grip action, with Schultze powder.'

'Ah! you mean,' said Elliot, 'the one with the only action that works
independently of the top lever spring.'

'Yes.'

'But not for partridges or pheasants.'

'For anything,' said Sharpe curtly.

'Come, you are mistaken,' replied Jack.

'Not at all,' said Sharpe doggedly.

'Excuse me,' said the young officer; 'as a sportsman and an
ex-instructor in musketry, you may permit me to have some knowledge
of fire-arms; but the one you refer to is for big game, and will
neither stick nor jam like the Government rubbish issued to us in
Egypt, and is based on the non-fouling principle.'

'Non-fowling?  It will shoot any fowl you aim at,' replied Sharpe,
mistaking his meaning; 'but you don't know what you are talking
about.'

Elliot simply raised his eyebrows and stared at the speaker for a
moment.

'You heard me?' added Sharpe, with an angry gleam in his eye.

Elliot turned to Skene and spoke of something else; but his cool and
steady, yet inoffensive, stare, and his ignoring the last defiant
remark, exasperated Hawkey Sharpe, who had--we have said--imbibed
more wine than he was wont; and, like all men of his class,
particularly felt the quiet contempt implied by the other's silence
and utter indifference to his presence--a spirit of defiance very
humiliating and difficult to grapple with, especially by the
underbred; thus, 'while nursing his wrath to keep it warm,' Sharpe
was determined to pursue a system of aggravation, and when Elliot
remarked to Roland, in pursuance of some general observations, that
shooting, even in the matter of black-game and muirgame, should never
begin till October, as thousands of young partridges that are not
fair game would escape being shot by gentlemen-poachers, or falling a
prey when in the hedges and hassocks to the mere pot-hunter--Hawkey
Sharpe contradicted him bluntly, without knowing what to urge on the
contrary, and made some blundering statements about following young
game into the standing corn, and how jolly it was to pot even young
pheasants in the standing barley during the month of September.

'In these little matters, my good man, you are rather at variance
with Colonel Hawker.'

'Who the devil is Hawker?' said Sharpe.

'A great authority on all such matters, sir,' said young Skene, 'and
not to have heard of him argues that you are--well, imperfectly up in
the subject.'

'Which we had better drop,' said Roland, with a dangerous sparkle in
his dark eyes; 'but pass the decanters, Jack--they stand with you.'

Mr. Hawkey Sharpe gave an audible sniff of contempt, meant,
doubtless, for Elliot, whose cool stare at him was now blended with a
smile indicative of curiosity and amusement, that proved alike
enraging and baffling.

When the gentlemen rose to join the ladies in the drawing-room,
whence came the distant notes of the piano and the voice of Annot
Drummond with her inevitable '_Du du_,' Hawkey Sharpe, with an
unpleasant consciousness that he had been somewhat foolish and had
the worst of his arguments, withdrew to his sanctum in the Beatoun
wing to growl and smoke over his brandy and soda, and was seen no
more for that night.

Pausing in the entrance-hall, Elliot said:

'Pardon me, Roland, but who is that unmitigated cad who contradicted
me so at table?--seemed to want to fix a quarrel, by Jove!'

Roland coloured.

'Why, you redden as if he was a bailiff in disguise--a man in
possession!' said Elliot, laughing.

'You forget, Jack, that such officials are unknown on this side of
the Border.'

'Then who or what is he?' persisted Elliot.

'My overseer--steward.'

'Steward--the devil! and you have a fellow of that kind at table.'

'Mrs. Lindsay has--not I,' replied Roland, with growing confusion and
annoyance.  'There are wheels within wheels here at Earlshaugh,
Jack--a little time and you shall know all, even before the pheasants
you disputed about are ready for potting.'

But before that period came, or the opportunity so lightly referred
to, much was to happen at Earlshaugh that none could at all foresee.




CHAPTER XVIII.

'MY LOVE SHE'S BUT A LASSIE YET.'

The First of September came in all that could be wished for the
shooting, in which, to Roland's disgust and Elliot's surprise, Hawkey
Sharpe took a part, but attired in accurate sporting costume, and
duly armed with an excellent breech-loader.  The corn was yellow in
some places, the stubble bare in others; there were rich 'bits' of
colour in every field, and silver clouds floating in the blue expanse
overhead.  In such light, says a writer with an artistic eye, 'the
white horses seem cut out of silver, the chestnuts of ruddy-gold;
while the black horses stand out against the sky as if cut in black
marble; and what gaps half a dozen reapers soon make in the standing
corn!'

Then the trails of the ground convolvulus and cyanus or corn-flower,
of every hue, may be seen, while the little gleaners are afield,
tolerated by a good-hearted farmer, who, like Boaz of old, may,
perhaps, permit the poor to glean 'even amongst the sheaves.'
Elsewhere the fern and heather-covered muirlands were beautiful, with
their tiny bushes laden with wild fruits, bramble, and sloe.

How the shooting progressed there--how coveys were flushed and
surrounded; how the brown birds rose whirring up, and the _cheepers_
tumbled over in quick succession or were caught by the dogs; how the
latter found the birds lurking among turnips or potatoes, or where
the uncut corn waved (for there they shelter, engender, and breed),
till they rose in coveys of twenty and even thirty--may not interest
the reader, so now we must hasten on to other points in our story,
having more important matters to relate; but, as Mr. Hawkey Sharpe
had an unpleasant reputation for shooting sometimes a little wildly,
and forgetting the line of fire, all--by the whispered advice of old
Fowler, the keeper--gave him a very wide berth in the field, and of
this he was angrily conscious.

Yet he brought upon himself the irate animadversions of most of the
sportsmen, and more particularly of Jack Elliot, by ill-using one of
the best pointers on the ground.  Trained by old Gavin Fowler, this
animal would not only stand at the scent of a bird or a hare, but, if
in company, would instantly _back_ if he saw another dog point.  This
perfection, the propensity to stand at the scent of game, though a
striking example of intelligence and docility, was so misunderstood
by Hawkey Sharpe that he dealt poor Ponto a blow with the butt-end of
his rifle, eliciting an oath from the white-haired keeper, and anger
from all--remarks which made him clench his teeth with rage and
mortification.

But, as the hot month of September is not meant for hard fagging, the
whole party were back at the house by luncheon-time, and the united
spoil of all the bags was duly laid out by braces on the pavement of
the court-yard, and a goodly show it made.

After shooting in the morning and forenoon, as there were three sets
of lovers among the party at Earlshaugh, much of the time was spent
in riding, driving, and rambling about the grounds and their
vicinity, while Roland found a congenial task in teaching Annot to
ride, as he had procured a most suitable pad for her, by the aid of
old Johnnie Buckle, at the Cupar Tuesday Fair; and just then nothing
seemed to exist for him but Annot's white soft cheek, her golden
hair, and the graceful little figure that made all other women look,
to his eyes, angular and peculiar; and then truly he felt that 'there
are days on which heaven opens to us all, though to many of us next
day it shuts again.'  And shut indeed it seemed to Malcolm Skene, who
followed Hester like her shadow, and whose eyes often wore a tender
and wistful intensity as he gazed upon her soft dark ones without
winning one responsive glance; and he would seek to lure her into the
subject that was nearest his own heart--his great love for her--while
with the rest, but always somewhat apart, they would ramble on by the
silvery birches in the Fairy's Den, by the King's Wood, with its
great old oaks and heaven-high Scottish firs that towered against the
blue sky; in the leafy dingles where the white-tailed rabbits
skurried out of their sandy holes, where the birds twittered
overhead, the black gleds soared skyward in the welkin, the dun deer
started from the rustling bracken and underwood, and so on to where
the woods grew more open, and there came distant glimpses of the
German Sea or perhaps of the Firth of Tay, rippling in the glory of
the evening sun as it set beyond the Sidlaw Hills.

Unlike Maude and Elliot, who took their assured regard with less
demonstration, Roland and Annot Drummond--owing doubtless to the
impressible and effusive nature of the latter young lady--were so
much together, everywhere and every way, as to provoke a smile among
their friends and an emotion of amusement, which certainly Hester
Maule did not share.

'Why did I come here after all?' she often asked of herself, as her
mind harked back to old days and dreams.  'I could have declined that
woman, old Deborah's invitation, and Roland's too.  Save papa's
suspicions, there was no compulsion upon me.  Fool that I have been
to come--yet,' she would add with a bitter smile, 'I shall not wear
my heart on my sleeve.'

Thus she seemed to lead the van in every proposed scheme for
amusement, and the attentions of her old admirer, Malcolm Skene, if
they failed to win, at least pleased and soothed her; and, watching
her sometimes, Roland would think--

'Well, after all, I am glad to see her so happy.'

A ball had early been proposed, but through the opposition or
mal-influence of Mrs. Lindsay the scheme proved a failure; visions of
the large dining-hall gay with floral decorations, the lines on the
floor and the ball cloth smooth and tight as a drum-head, passed
away, and a simple, half-impromptu carpet-dance was substituted;
hired musicians were procured from the nearest town, and all the
invited--even Hester--looked forward to a night of enjoyment; and,
sooth to say, since her visit she had sedulously done all in her
power to avoid meeting Roland alone--no difficult matter, so occupied
was he with Annot; and then Earlshaugh was a large and rambling old
house, intersected by tortuous passages without end, little landings
and flights of steps in unexpected places, rooms opening curiously
out of each other, and turret stairs up and down, the result of
repairs and additions in past times: thus, while it was a glorious
old house for flirtation, for appointments and partings, it was quite
possible for two persons to reside therein and yet meet each other
seldom, unless they wished it to be otherwise.

It was impossible for the mind of Hester not to dwell on the time
when Roland was--as she thought--her lover; of rambles and
conversations and silences that were eloquent, and beatings of the
heart in the bat-haunted gloaming, when the Esk gurgled over its
stony bed and the crescent moon was in the violet-tinted sky.

She thought she had got over it all, but she had not yet--she felt
that she had not; but now Malcolm Skene was there, and she might if
she chose show Roland the sceptre of power, and that the art of
pleasing was still hers as ever.

Roland had actually been more than once on the point of seeking some
apologetic explanation with her; in his inner consciousness he felt
that he owed it to her; but he shrank from it with a species of moral
cowardice--he who had hacked his way out of the carnage of Kashgate,
and ridden through the slaughter of other Egyptian fields; and though
he had often rehearsed in his mind the _amende_ he owed her, how
could he dare to approach it?

'It was a mistake of his at Merlwood thinking that he loved me,'
Hester would ponder on the other hand; 'and he did not know
then--still less did I--that it was a mistake; but I know it now!
The only thing left for me is to school myself, if I can, to love him
as a friend or sister, a cousin merely.  But it is hard--hard after
all; and for such an artificial girl as Annot!'

Maude's carpet-dance--for the idea was hers--proved a great success,
and many were present to whom, as they have no place in our story, we
need not refer; but the music was excellent, and from an arched and
partially curtained recess of the Red Drawing-room it swelled along
the lofty ceilings and through the stately apartment, on the floor of
which the dancers glided away to their hearts' content.

Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, bold and unabashed, was there attired _de rigueur_
in evening costume; but even he did not venture on asking Maude to
favour him with one dance; yet he ground his sharp teeth from time to
time as he watched her and Captain Elliot, and overheard some--but
only some of his remarks to her, though Hawkey had the ears of a fox.

'Maudie, darling, I am afraid you are tired,' said Jack tenderly,
pausing for a moment.

'Already?  Not at all, Jack; I would go on for ever,' exclaimed the
girl, and they swept away again.

To her how delightful it was, waltzing with him--his hand pressed
lightly on her willowy waist, her fingers, gloved and soft and
slender, just resting on his shoulder; a faint perfume of her silky
hair, a drowsy languor in every movement and in the whole situation.

'After we are married, Maudie,' whispered Jack, 'I am sure I shall
disapprove of waltzing.'

'Disapprove--why?'

'Because I shall hate to see you whirling away with another.'

'Don't be a goose, Jack.'

'Won't I have the right to forbid you?'

'A right I shall not recognise.  You surely would not be jealous of
me?'

'Of you--no; but of others--a humiliating confession, is it not?' he
added, smiling tenderly down upon her.

Though it was all a hastily got up and _impromptu_ affair, Maude and
Annot were radiantly happy; the latter in securing such a lover as
Roland Lindsay, with all his surroundings, which she appreciated
highly, as they far exceeded the most brilliant hopes and aspirations
of herself and her match-making mother in South Belgravia.  Her soft
cheeks flushed and paled, and her tiny feet--for tiny they were as
those of Cinderella--beat responsive to the music; and in the fulness
of her own joy even her original emotions of covetousness, and
ambition perhaps, were dimmed or lessened; while the dances which she
had with Roland seemed quite unlike those she had enjoyed with other
men; even when Hawkey Sharpe, who, being a Scotchman, danced of
course, ploughing away with the minister's good-natured daughter,
cannoned with some violence against them, and made Roland frown and
mutter under his moustache till he drew Annot into the recess of a
window, and while fanning her, and in doing so lightly ruffling Her
shining hair, talked that soft nonsense so dear to them then.

'How childlike you are, Annot, in the brightness of your joy and in
your genuine love of amusement!' said he admiringly, as he stooped
over her.

'I feel as light as a bird when I hear good dance music like that and
have such a good partner as you, Roland,' she exclaimed, looking up,
her green hazel eyes beaming with pleasure.

'How could it be otherwise,' said he, 'when,

  "My love she's but a lassie yet,
  A lightsome, lovely lassie yet."

a sweet one that never had even a passing _penchant_, I am sure, or
perhaps a flirtation!'

'Yet having a very decided tendency thereto.' replied Annot, with one
of her arch smiles.  'But nothing more, dear Roland, nothing more!'
she added, perfectly oblivious of poor Bob Hoyle and many other
'detrimentals,' as Mamma Drummond called them.

'Have you never had even what the French call a _caprice_?' he asked,
with a soft laugh and a fond glance.

'Never--never--till----'

'Till when?'

'I came to Merlwood.'

'My little darling!'

'So Hester and Mr. Skene are dancing together again,' said Annot,
anxious to change what she deemed a dangerous subject.  'I saw her
dancing with Captain Elliot after you resigned her.'

'Yes--she seems enjoying herself, poor Hester!'

'I am so glad to see her with Mr. Skene.'

'Why?'

'Because I hope they will marry yet, and bring their little comedy to
a close.'

'How a young girl's mind always runs on love and marriage!' said
Roland.  'But this little comedy you refer to, I never heard of it,
save from yourself.'

'Indeed!' replied Annot, who, from cogent reasons of her own, was
anxious to make the most of Skene's undoubted admiration for Hester.
'I've noticed them greatly in London.'

'I always knew that Malcolm was her unvarying admirer, who singled
her out in the Edinburgh assemblies and balls elsewhere from the
first, and had, of course, poured much sweet nonsense into her pretty
little ears--treasured flowers she had worn, gloves, handkerchiefs,
bits of ribbon, and all that sort of thing----'

'Which you all do?'

'That I don't admit, Annot.'

'Anyway, this absurd appreciation of each other's society was a
source of great amusement to us in London,' she continued, not very
fairly, so far as concerned Hester; but then Annot, a far-seeing
young lady, was full of past preconceived suspicions and of present
plans of her own.

'However, Annot, this little affair is nothing to us--to _me_,' added
Roland, and oddly enough, with the slightest _soupçon_ of pique in
his glance and tone, as he saw Malcolm Skene, a tall and stately
fellow, who might please any woman's eye--and did please the eyes of
many--leading his dark-eyed and dark-haired cousin, not into the
whirl of dances, nor to the refreshment-room, but--as if almost
unconsciously--towards the entrance of the long and dimly-lighted
conservatory which opened off the Red Drawing-room.

As Jack Elliot was too well-bred a man to attract attention by
dancing too much with Maude, his _fiancée_, the observant Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe saw, with no small satisfaction, that for nearly the remainder
of the night he bestowed the most of his attention on strangers,
wholly intent that Maude's little entertainment should please all and
go off well, and that intention, which Mr. Sharpe misunderstood, was
one of the causes that led to a serious misadventure at a future time.

Old Gavin Fowler, as he carried Ponto home in his arms to his own
lodge, while the dog, conscious of kindness, whined and licked his
weather-beaten hands, had muttered between his teeth to Roland:

'A better dog never entered a field!  Eleven years has he followed
me, and now he is thirteen years auld, and can yet find game wi' the
youngest and the best whelp we hae; and to think that he should get
sic a clowre from a clod like that!  But dogs bark as they are
bred--so does Hawkey Sharpe!  He's like the witches o' Auchencraw;
he'll get mair for your ill than your gude.'

A proverb that means, favours are often granted an individual through
fear of his malevolence.

Roland felt all the words implied, and colouring, said, pale with
anger:

'He shall pay up this score and others, I hope, ere long, Gavin.'

And Mrs. Lindsay placed her hand upon her heart, on hearing of the
episode, and was secretly thankful that the only one who suffered
from Hawkey's jealous vengeance was poor Ponto, the pointer.




CHAPTER XIX.

HESTER RECEIVES A PROPOSAL.

Annot was certainly curious to know what was passing between the two
whom she had seen wandering into the cooler atmosphere of the
conservatory; but she could not at the same time relinquish the
society of Roland, and to suggest that they should adjourn thither
might only mar the end she wished--without any real affection for
Hester--to come to pass, as she had not been without her own
suspicions retrospectively.  But, sore though it was, we fear that
the heart of Hester Maule was not to be caught on the rebound.

And in dread and dislike of Annot's observation, her jests and
comments, she had--so far as she could--lately avoided being, if
possible, for a moment alone with Malcolm Skene, or giving him an
opportunity of addressing her, and he had felt this keenly.

In the long drawing-room the dancing was still gaily in progress, and
the soft strains of Strauss went floating along the leafy and
gorgeous aisles of the conservatory, where Skene and Hester had--so
far as she was concerned--unconsciously wandered.  She seated
herself, wearily and flushed with dancing, while he hung over her,
with his elbow resting on a shelf of flowers, while looking pensively
and tenderly down on her--on the heaving of her rounded bosom, her
long dark lashes, and the clear white parting of the rich brown hair
on her shapely head, longing with all his soul to place his arms
round her, and draw that beloved head caressingly on his breast; and
yet the words he said at first were somewhat commonplace after all.
But Hester, while slowly fanning herself to hide the tremulousness of
her hands, knew and felt intuitively that a scene between them was on
the tapis; and, deeming it inevitable at some time or other, she
thought the sooner it was over the better; and in the then weariness
of her heart, she felt a little reckless; but his introductory
remarks surprised her by their bluntness.

'My life now seems but one manoeuvre, Miss Maule--to be alone with
you for a moment or two.'

Hester made some inaudible reply; so he resumed:

'I have heard it said by some--by whom matters not--that you are
engaged, Miss Maule?'

'Then they know more than I do--but to whom have my good friends
assigned me?'

'To your cousin.'

'Roland!'

'Yes.'

'I am not engaged to Roland certainly,' replied Hester, her lips and
eyelashes quivering as she spoke.

'I thought not,' said Malcolm Skene, gathering courage; 'Miss
Drummond seems to me his chief attraction.  If he is as happy as I
wish him, he will be the happiest of deserving men.'

'The phrase of a novel writer, Mr. Skene,' said Hester, a little
bitterly, as she thought over some episodes at Merlwood; 'but do not
talk so inflatedly of what men deserve.  The best of them are often
unwise, unkind, unjust.'

'Do not blame all men for the faults perhaps of one,' said Skene at
haphazard, and a little unluckily, as the speech went home to
Hester's heart.  She grew pale, as if he had divined her secret.

'I do not understand you,' she faltered a little haughtily, while
flashing one upward glance at him.

'Considering the way you view men now, and the way you avoid or
rebuff me, I wonder that I have got a word with you, as I do
to-night.'

'Do I rebuff you?'

'Yes--to my sorrow, I have felt it.'

'Sorrow--of what do you really accuse me?'

'Treating me with coldness, distance----'

'I am not aware--that--that----' she paused, not knowing what to say.

'Hester--dearest Hester,' said he in a low and earnest voice, while
stealing nearer her and assuring himself by one swift glance that
they were alone in the conservatory; 'let me call you so, were it
only for to-night--you know how long I have loved you, and surely you
will love me a little in time.  I know how true, how tender of heart
you are; I know, too, that I have no rival in the present--with the
past I have nothing to do; but tell me, even silently, by one touch
of your hand, that you love me in turn, or will try to love me in
time, Hester--dear, dear Hester!'

She opened her lips, but no sound came from them, and her interlaced
hands trembled in her lap, for the 'scene' had gone somewhat beyond
her idea in depth and earnestness; and she felt that Malcolm Skene's
deduction as regarded there being no rival in the present was a
mistake in one sense.

Encouraged by her silence, and construing it in his own favour,
little conceiving that her head was then full of a false idol, he
resumed:

'Hester, ever since I first saw and knew you, it has been the great
hope of my existence to make you my wife.'

Still the girl was voiceless, and felt chained to her seat.

She could feel--yea, could hear her heart beating painfully, as she
had a pure regard and most perfect esteem for the young fellow by her
side; and thought that to the end of her days the perfume of the lily
of the valley, of stephanotis, and other plants close by would come
back to memory with Malcolm's voice, the strains of Strauss, the
strange atmosphere of the conservatory, and the dull sense of
unreality that was over her then.

'Oh, Hester, will you not tell me that you will try to love me--to
love me a little?  Have you not a single word to give me?'

Passionately earnest were his handsome eyes--anxious and eager was
his lowered voice and the expression of his clearly cut face.  He
said nothing to her, as other men might have done, of his fortune, of
his estate, of his lands of Dunnimarle that overlooked the Forth, of
his prospects or his future; all such items were forgotten in the
present.  Neither did he urge that he was going far--far away from
her soon--much sooner than he had then the least idea of--to enhance
his value in her eyes, or win her interest in his favour; for even
that, too, he forgot.

She looked up at him with her soft, velvety, dark-blue eyes suffused,
gravely and kindly; the charming little tint gone from her rounded
cheeks; her whole face looking very sweet and fair, but not wearing
the expression of one who listened with happiness to a welcome tale
of love.

'Oh, why do you say all this to me, Mr. Skene--Malcolm I shall call
you for old acquaintance' sake--why ask me to marry you?'

'Why? a strange question, Hester,' said he, a little baffled by her
apparent self-possession, while tremulous with joy to hear for the
first time his Christian name upon her lips.

'Yes--why?' she asked, wearily and sadly.

'Because I love you as much as it is in the nature of an honest man
to love a woman.'

'But--but I do not return the sentiment--I cannot love you as you
would wish.'

'Not even in the end, Hester?'

'What end?'

'Any time I may give you and hopefully wait for?'

She shook her head and cast down her white eyelids.

'And yet no one else seeks your love?' said he a little reproachfully.

'No one else.'

'Can I never make you care for me?' he urged in a kind of dull
desperation.

'Pardon me--but I do not think so; my regard, my friendship and
gratitude will ever be yours; but please--please,' she added almost
piteously, 'do not let us recur to this matter again.'

'You feel the impossibility----'

'Of receiving your words as you wish.'

'You are at least candid with me, Hester; and I shall, indeed,
trouble you no more.'

He spoke with more grief than bitterness, as he dropped the little
and softly gloved hand which he had captured for a moment.

She then passed it over his arm and rose, as if to show that all was
over and that they were to return to the drawing-room--which she now
deeply regretted having quitted--and with them the dancing, the joy,
and the brilliance of Maude's little fête had departed for the night.

Skene felt that nothing was left for him now but to quit Earlshaugh
at once, and the time and the hour came sooner than he expected, and
all the more welcome now.

But the adventures of the night--adventures in which Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe bore a somewhat prominent part--were not yet over.




CHAPTER XX.

MR. SHARPE MAKES A MISTAKE.

Maude, though she knew not then the reason, had seen how Hester
Maule, after coming from the conservatory, with a kind of good-night
bow to Skene, had abruptly quitted the dancers, and looking pale,
ill, and utterly out of spirits, had retired to her own room, whither
she soon accompanied her; but failing to learn the reason of her
discomposure, was returning downstairs to have one last turn with
Jack Elliot, when she suddenly met Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, the result of
whose attentions to the wine in the refreshment-room was pretty
apparent in his face and watery gray eyes, and he paused unsteadily
with a hand on the great oaken banisters.

As Maude came tripping down the broad stone staircase with leisurely
grace and clad in a soft and most becoming dress, one of those 'whose
apparently inexpensive simplicity men innocently admire, and over the
bills for which husbands and fathers wag their heads aghast,' he
glanced appreciatively at her snowy neck and shoulders, where her
girlish plumpness hid even the small collar-bones; at her beautiful,
blooming face, her sunny hair; her petulant, scornful mouth, and
delicate profile; while she, with some remembrance of how he had
acquitted himself among the dancers, and when waltzing, in attempting
to reverse, had spread dismay around him, for a moment felt inclined
to smile.

Wine gave Hawkey Sharpe fresh courage, and just then some new
thoughts had begun to occur to him.

He had seen that--unlike young Malcolm Skene, who hovered about
Hester like her shadow, and unlike Roland, who was never absent from
the side of Annot--Captain Elliot and Maude were not apparently
overmuch together; for in the assured position of their love and
engagement they seemed in society very much like other persons.  He
was ignorant of the mystery that there could be

  'Sighs the deeper for suppression,
  And stolen glances sweeter for the theft,'

and in the coarseness of his nature and lack of fine perception he
mistook the situation, and began to think that, notwithstanding all
he heard mooted, and notwithstanding the fact of seeing a letter
addressed in Maude's handwriting to the gentleman in question, there
might be 'nothing in it,' but perhaps an incipient flirtation; and he
had resolved on the first opportune occasion to renew his
pretensions, as the Captain had evidently danced much with other
girls--perhaps, he thought, had preferred them--during the past night.

And now it seemed the time had come; and, over and above all his
extreme assurance, he thought to win through her terror and necessity
of temporizing for appearance' sake what she never might yield to any
regard for himself; and even now, as he prepared to address her,
anger, fear, and a sickly sense of humiliation suddenly came into the
heart of Maude, though a moment before it had been beating happily
with thoughts that were all her own.

'I hope,' said he, with what he meant for a smile, but was more like
a grimace, 'that you enjoyed the dancing to-night, Miss Lindsay?'

'Thanks,' replied Maude curtly.  'I hope you, too, have been amused,'
she added, making a side step to pass, but, as on a previous
occasion, he barred the way, and said:

'I did not venture to ask you for one dance, even.'

Maude, who deemed his presence there, though at the invitation most
probably of her stepmother, presumption enough, smiled coldly and
haughtily, and was about to pass down with a bow, which might mean
anything, when, still opposing her progress, he said, while eyeing
her fair beauty with undisguised admiration, and with a would-be soft
voice, which, however, was rather 'feathery':

'Have you quite forgotten the subject on which I last addressed you?'

'The subject!'

'Yes.'

'I have not forgotten your profound presumption, Mr. Sharpe, as I
then called it, if it is to that you refer,' replied Maude, trembling
with anger.

'Presumption!  You so style my veneration--my regard--my----'

'Take care what you say, sir, and how you may provoke my extreme
patience too far,' interrupted Maude, her face now blanched and pale.

'Your patience! _that_ for it!' said he, suddenly snapping his
fingers, and giving way to a sudden gust of coarse anger that caused
his cheeks to redden and his eyes to gleam.  'It is your fear of
me--your fear of me for your brother and his popinjay friends that
gives you what you pretend to call patience, Maude Lindsay, and by
the heavens above us,' he continued, wine and rage mounting into his
brain together, 'by the heavens above us, I say, if that fellow
Elliot--

What he was about to say remains unknown, as it was suddenly cut
short.  A hand from behind was laid firmly on his right ear, and by
that he was twisted round, flaming with rage, fury, and no small
amount of pain, to find himself confronted by the calm, stern, and
inquiring face of the very person he referred to--Captain Elliot.

There was a half-minute's pause after the latter flung Hawkey Sharpe
aside.

The steward glared at his assailant, who scarcely knew what to make
of the situation, a sound like a hiss escaping through his teeth in
his speechless rage and sense of affront, he clenched his hands till
the spiky nails pierced his flesh.  He grew deadly pale, and, with an
almost grotesque expression of hate there is no describing in his
pale, shifty, and watery eyes, he turned away muttering something
deeply and huskily; while with a smile of disdain Jack Elliot drew
the trembling girl's arm through his own and led her downstairs; but
her dancing was over for that night.

'Maudie, darling, is that fellow mad?  What the deuce is all this
about?' asked Elliot, full of concern and surprise.

'Jack, dear Jack,' said Maude beseechingly, and in tears now, 'I
implore you not to speak to Roland of this unseemly episode.'

'The fellow seems to have taken too much wine.'

'Yes, Jack, and forgot himself.'

'But he should have remembered you, and who you are.'

'But you don't know--you can't know, how Roland is situated,' said
Maude, in a breathless and broken voice.

'I suspect much; but there--don't weep, Maude; the fellow's whole
existence is not worth one of your tears.'

Maude was full of fear and distress for what might ensue if Roland
knew all.  Alas! she could very little foresee what _did_ ensue.

But notwithstanding his promise to Maude, Elliot was too puzzled by
the apparent mystery, and her too evident sense of grief and
mortification, not to make some small reference to the affair when he
and Roland met for a farewell cigar in the smoke-room, after the last
of the guests had driven away.  He kept, however, Maude's name out of
the matter.

'I am loth, Roland, to have an unseemly row with one of your
dependents; but, d--n me, if I don't feel inclined to lash that
fellow--Sharpe, I think, his name is!'

'He is certainly an underbred fellow,' said Roland uneasily.

'Then why not send him to the right-about?'

'Easier said than done, Jack--if you knew all,' said Roland, almost
with a groan; 'but has he been rude to you?'

'To me--well--yes, in a way he has.'

'With all his impudent would-be air of ease, it is evident he has
none, as one may see at a glance,' said Skene, who had been smoking
moodily in a corner, 'he is a man who does not know what to do with
his legs and arms, or to seem in any way at ease like a gentleman.'

'I feel at times that I would like to kick the fellow,' said Roland,
with a sudden gush of anger, 'when he sits with that aggravating
smile and see-nothing look on his face, yet "taking stock" of
everyone and everything all round--all the while answering me so
softly, when he knows that I am burning with contempt and dislike of
him.  If he would get into a passion and fly out I would respect him
more, but he seems to be for ever biding his time--his time for
what?' added Roland, almost to himself.

'Passion?  You should have seen him to-night!' said Elliot, who,
unfortunately for himself, had not yet seen the tail of the storm he
had roused; 'but why give him house-room, I say?'

'He is just now a necessary evil--a little time, Jack, and you shall
know all,' replied Roland in a somewhat dejected voice; so Elliot
said no more.

Meantime the subject of these remarks had betaken him to his own
apartments, and certainly as he had ascended the old hollowed steps
of the turret stair that led thereto they seemed, according to the
Earlshaugh legend, to lead down rather than up.

'I'll be even with you, Miss Maude Lindsay, some fine day--see if I
am not!' he muttered as he went; 'your high and mighty hoity-toity
airs will be the ruin of you and yours.  And as for that fellow
Elliot, I'll take change out of him--make cold meat of him, by
heaven, if I can!'

Sobered by rage he reached his peculiar sanctum, and sat down there
to scheme out revenge, through the medium of a briar-root from his
rack of pipes, and brandy and soda from a cellarette he possessed.

'I'll marry that girl Maude--or--by Jove! not a bad idea, the _other_
one, with the golden hair, if old Deb fails me, which I can scarcely
think.  The little party with the golden hair seems game for
anything,' he added, showing more acuteness than Roland in the
matter.  'Why shouldn't I?  I am going in for respectability now, and
I rather flatter myself I am as good as any of that Brummagem lot
downstairs, for all their coats of arms, pedigrees, and bosh!  I'm in
clover here--in society now, and, by Jove, I'll keep to it.  But,
Deb,' he continued talking aloud, as the new beverage cast loose his
tongue, 'her heart is in a bad way--devil a doubt of that!  The
doctors assure me of it--is breaking up--breaking up--tell more to me
than they have done to her; and that she may go off any time like a
farthing candle!  Poor Deb--she is not half a bad sort--yet I wish
she would settle her little affairs and----'

A sound made him look round, and he saw his sister looking
pale--white indeed--and weary, with an unpleasant expression in her
cold, deep eyes, and a palpable knit on her usually smooth and
lineless forehead.

'How much had she overheard?' was Hawkey's first fearful thought.

'My dear Deb,' he stammered, 'I was just thinking that you should
make the whole of that pack clear out of the house--they are too much
for you, and the house is yours!  Have a little brandy and water,
Deb--you look so ill!  Poor, dear Deb,' he continued in a maudlin
way, 'if anything happened to you, you know how I should sorrow for
it.'

'I have no intention of affording you that opportunity yet,' she
replied, with something of a flash in her eyes.




CHAPTER XXI.

MALCOLM SKENE.

The sportsmen assembled next morning a little later than usual, and
after hastily partaking of coffee, were about to set forth after the
partridges, with dogs, keepers, and beaters, to a particular spot
where Gavin Fowler assured them that the coveys were so thick as to
cover the ground, when Malcolm Skene, whom all were beginning to
miss, suddenly appeared, but minus gun, shot belt, and other shooting
paraphernalia, yet with a brighter smile on his face that it had won
overnight.

'What is up, Malcolm?' asked Roland; 'don't you go with us?'

'Impossible!  I have just had a telegram from the Colonel.  The corps
is short of officers, from sickness, casualties, and so forth; so I
must resign my leave and start at once.'

'For the depôt?'

'No--for Egypt,' continued Skene, 'so I must be off.  Let me have a
trap, Roland, that I may catch the up train for the South.'

'This is sudden!' exclaimed several.

'Sudden indeed--but no less welcome,'

'I am so sorry, old fellow!' exclaimed Roland, 'when the birds are in
such excellent order, too.'

'I can scarcely realize it,' said Skene, whose thoughts were not with
the birds certainly.  'In a fortnight, I shall be again in my
fighting kit and in the land of the Pharaohs.'

Ignorant of what had so suddenly transpired, Hester, for whom he
looked anxiously and wistfully, was lingering in her room, till the
shooting party should have gone forth, unwilling to face Malcolm
Skene after the interview of last night, and full of a determination
to return at once to Merlwood, to her old life by the wooded Esk,
with her silver-haired father, his bubbling hookah, and his Indian
reminiscences--oh! how well she knew them all!  But Maude, and even
the selfish and apparently volatile Annot, regarded the handsome
fellow with deep interest, and the lips of the former were white and
quivering as she bade him adieu.

'Good-bye, all you fellows;' he exclaimed, when old Buckle came with
the trap to the _porte-cochère_.  'Good-bye, Roland and you,
Jack--when shall we three meet again?  In thunder and all the rest of
it, no doubt.  Farewell, Miss Lindsay--Maude I may call you just
now--bid Hes--, your cousin, adieu for me, and God keep you all till
we meet once more--if ever!' he added, under his moustache.

Another moment he was gone, and no trace remained of him but the
wheel-tracks in the avenue.

'Good-bye--good-bye;' it sounded like a dirge in the air of the warm
autumn morning.

'Poor Malcolm--he is the king of good fellows,' said Roland to his
friends who were gathered in the entrance-hall, just as Hester Maule,
pale as a lily, after vainly practising a little the art of smiling
and looking happy in her mirror, appeared at the foot of the
staircase, and heard what had occurred.

'Yes--Skene has just gone, poor fellow.  Should you not have liked to
have bade him farewell?'

'Yes--of course,' said Hester, with colourless lips; but thought, 'it
is better not--better not _now_.'

'His last message was to _you_,' whispered Maude.

'Well--it will be my turn next, and yours too, Elliot,' said Roland
as he lit a cigarette.

'It but reminds me of Wolfe's song,' added Elliot cheerily, as he
sang in a tragic-comic way--

  'Let mirth and wine abound.
  The trumpets sound,
    And the colours flying are, my boys!
  'Tis he, you, or I,
  Whose business is to die;
    Then why should we be melancholy, boys,
  Whose business is to die?'

Come along--here are the dogs.'

'Skene's departure seems to have upset you girls,' said Roland, 'and
now, Hester, my dear cousin,' he added in a blundering way, 'you look
as pale as if Melancholy had marked you for her own.'

'Don't jest, Roland,' said Maude; 'Malcolm Skene looks like one who
has a history behind him, and a strange destiny before him.  Only
think, Roland,' she added in a whisper, as she drew her brother
aside; 'he proposed to Hester in the conservatory last night!'

'And--and she----'

'Refused him.'

'Why?'

Maude only shook her pretty head; but his heart told him too probably
_why_, and for a time his conscience smote him.

'Don't you think she was foolish?' asked Maude; 'I certainly told her
that I thought so, as Malcolm is such a lovable fellow.'

'And what did she say?'

'Replied, with a feeble laugh, that she meant to die an
unappropriated blessing.'

'What is that, Maudie?'

'An old maid.'

'Nonsense--a handsome girl like Hester!'

To do the latter justice, she asked herself more than once why had
she refused him, and for _what_?

Many may deem that Hester acted a foolish part: but her heart was too
sore, and still too full of regard for another to find a place in it
for the love of Malcolm Skene, though she knew it had been hers in
the past, ready to lay at her feet.

Steadfast of purpose, she was, in some respects, a remarkable girl,
Hester Maule.  Roland, her companion in childhood, as we have
elsewhere stated, was the one love of her life.

'All of hers upon that die was thrown,' and her heart was not to be
caught on the rebound, through pique, pride, soreness, or
disappointment.

But now that Malcolm was gone, Hester in solitude could not but give
a few tears as she thought of his true regard for her; his stately
presence, his soft earnestness, and his sad, tender eyes--thought
over all that--but for Roland's image--might have been; and of the
high compliment Skene's honest and gallant heart had paid her; but
all--even could she have wished it otherwise--was over now, and he
had gone to that fatal land of battle and disease, where so many
found their graves then!

Did Roland jest when he asked if Melancholy had marked her for its
own?  If so, it was a species of wound, and she felt that 'it is only
wounds inflicted by those we love whose sting lasts.'

Maude and Annot, with the old groom, Johnnie Buckle, as their
_Escudero_, had gone for a 'spin' on their pads as far as Kilmany, to
visit the Gaules-Den, a deep ravine through which a river runs; Mrs.
Lindsay was in the seclusion of her own room, as usual at that time
of the day, when she took some kind of drops for her heart, and
Hester, left alone to silence and solitude, mentally followed Malcolm
Skene in his journey southward.  Her hands were folded idly in her
lap; a kind of sad listlessness was all over her, and her soft dark
eyes were dreamily fixed on vacancy, and seemed to see--if we may say
so--visions, while, as on yesternight, the perfume of the lily of the
valley, of the stephanotis, and other flowers was floating round her.

She thought she might have seen him once again had she gone
downstairs at the usual time--but have seen him to what end or
purpose, constituted as her mind was then?  Better not.

In these days it seemed to Hester that there was not one of her
actions which she did not repent of before it was half conceived or
half acted upon.

The forenoon sun soared hot and high, and the drowsy flies and one
huge humming bee, enclosed by the windows of her room, made their
useless journeys up and down the panes, on which the climbing ivy
pattered; the birds twittered among the leaves of the latter; an
occasional dog barked in the stable-yard, and the voice of the
peacock--never pleasant at any time--was heard on the terrace
without; but soon other sounds--voices indicative of excitement and
alarm--caused her to rise, throw open a window in the deep embayment
of the ancient wall, and look out.

Advancing across the emerald sward of the lawn, but slowly and
carefully, came a group--the sportsmen of the morning, with their
guns sloped on the shoulder or carried under an arm, and the dogs
cowering, as if overawed, about their footsteps.

What was the cause of this?  What had happened?

Four men were bearing a fifth on a stretcher or hurdle of some
kind--a man either terribly wounded or dead, he lay so still--so very
still!

A half-stifled cry escaped Hester, as she rushed downstairs, for some
dreadful catastrophe had evidently taken place!




CHAPTER XXII.

A FATAL SHOT.

When the shooting party, after being somewhat delayed by Skene's
unexpected departure, was setting forth, Roland and Elliot, with no
small indignation, and confounded by his profound assurance, saw
Hawkey Sharpe join them, belted, accoutred, gaitered, and gun in
hand, looking quite sobered and fresh, having doubtless just had from
Mr. Funnell 'a hair of the dog that bit him' overnight.

'That fellow here, actually--after all!' said Roland through his
clenched teeth, though Elliot had given him but a vague outline of
Sharpe's rudeness, remembering Maude's earnest desire and evident
anxiety.

While somewhat 'dashed' by the coolness of his reception by all--even
to old Ponto the setter, who gave him a wide berth--Mr. Hawkey Sharpe
was mean enough--or subtle enough--to hammer a kind of excuse for
'some mistake' he had made last night, attributing it to the wine he
had taken--mixing champagne and claret-cup with brandies and soda--of
all of which he had certainly imbibed freely, as his still
yellow-balled and bloodshot eyes bore witness.

Elliot heard him with a fixed stare of calm disdain; while Roland,
writhing in his soul, still temporized--despising himself heartily
the while--for the sake of appearances, but determined now, before
twenty-four hours were past, to get at the bottom of the mystery--to
ascertain the real state of his affairs.

There was something in Jack Elliot's well-bred and steady stare, as
he focussed him with his eye-glass, that expressed vague wonder,
_insouciance_, and no small contempt; it enraged Hawkey Sharpe and
made his whole heart seem to burn in his breast with hate and
suppressed passion, while fixing his own eyeglass defiantly and
attempting suavely to say:

'Good-morning, Captain Lindsay--good-morning, gentlemen, _all_.'

Roland could scarcely master his passion or the impulse to club his
fowling-piece and knock the fellow down.

'Mr. Sharpe,' said he in a low voice that seemed all unlike his own,
so low and husky was it, as he beckoned Hawkey aside, 'considering
the rudeness of which I understand you were guilty last night, I
wonder that you have the bad taste to address me at all, or thrust
yourself upon our society.'

'Thrust--Captain Lindsay!' exclaimed Sharpe, in turn suppressing his
rage.

'Yes--I repeat that considering there was something--I scarcely know
what--amounting to a fracas between my friend Captain Elliot and you,
I also wonder--nathless your relative and assumed position in this
house--that you venture to join my party this morning.'

It was the first time that Roland had spoken so plainly to this
obnoxious personage.

'I don't quite understand all your words imply,' replied the latter
with an assumption of dignity and would-be _hauteur_ that sat
grotesquely upon him.  'I am in the house of my sister, Mrs. Lindsay
of Earlshaugh, who has accorded me permission to shoot, and shoot I
shall whether you like it or not!'

'For the last time, I trust,' muttered Roland under his moustache.

'That we shall see,' was the mocking remark of Hawkey, who overheard
him.

Roland turned abruptly away, loth to excite comment or surprise among
his friends by the strange bearing of one deemed by them his mere
dependent.

So the shooting progressed, and for a time without let or impediment.
Away through the King's Wood and the Fairy's Den went the sportsmen,
over the harvest fields, so rich in beauty to the picture-loving eye,
by the green and scented hawthorn hedgerows, where the golden spoil
of the passing corn carts remained for the gleaner; among brambles
and red fern--the crimson bracken that, according to the Scottish
proverb, brings milk and butter in October; firing in line, as
adjusted by old Gavin Fowler; and as their guns went off, bang, bang,
bang, in the clear and ambient air, when the startled coveys went
whirring up, the brown birds came tumbling down with outspread wings,
before the double barrels.

If the autumn sunset in Scotland is lovely, not less so is the autumn
sunrise, when seen from the slope of some green hill, like the spur
of the Ochils that looks down on Logic, while through pastoral valley
and wooded haugh the white silver mist is rolling.  'Then the tops of
the trees seem at first to rise above a country that is flooded,
while the kirk spire appears like some sea mark heaving out of the
mist.  Then comes a great wedge-like beam of gold, cutting deep down
into the hollows, showing the stems of the trees and the roofs of the
cottages, gilding barn and outhouse, making a golden road through a
land of white mist that seems to rise on either side like the sea
which Moses divided to pass through dryshod.  The dew-drops on the
sun-lighted summit the feet rest upon, are coloured like precious
stones of every dye, and every blade of grass is beaded with the
gorgeous gems.'

And never do the deer look more graceful and beautiful than when in
autumn they leave their lair among the bracken, when the blue
atmosphere is on a Scottish mountain side, and changing hues are on
leafy grove and heath-clad slope.

As the sportsmen, now pretty far apart, after beating successfully up
the slope of a stubble field on a hill-side, came upon some aged and
irregular hedgerows, full of gaps and interspersed with stunted
thorn-trees, and having on each side a wet grassy ditch, the warning
voice of the old keeper was heard some paces in the rear:

'Tak' tent, gentlemen; tak' tent.  Nae cross shots here.  There is a
different ground owre beyond.'

A covey of some twenty birds whirred up from a gap in the hedge, and
both Elliot and Hawkey Sharpe seemed to fire at it.  We say seemed,
as the former fired straight to his front, the latter, who was on his
right, obliquely to the left; and then there came a sharp cry of
anguish and pain but seldom or never heard among a group of gay
sportsmen.

'By the Lord, but he's done it at last,' cried old Fowler.

'I aye thocht he wad be the death on the field o' somebody,' cried
Jamie Spens, the ex-poacher, who was acting as a beater.

'Sharpe's dune it at last,' cried Fowler again.

'What--who--what?' said a dozen voices.

'Murdered some ane--hang me if it isna Captain Elliot.  Sharpe's a
devilish gleed gunner, if ever there was ane.'

Hawkey Sharpe heard these excited exclamations as if in a dream, and
as if heard by another and not himself.

He had unexpectedly seen Jack Elliot come, if not in his line of
fire, unseen by others, within range of it; and though hitherto
vaguely intent on mischief, a sudden, a devil-born impulse came like
a flash of lightning over him.

He fired, and Jack Elliot dropped like a stone!

The moment he had done so the heart of Hawkey Sharpe seemed to stand
still; enmity, rivalry, and affront were all forgotten--seemed never
to have existed.  There was a roaring or surging of the blood in his
ears, while a sudden darkness seemed to fall upon the sunshiny
landscape.

Was it accident or murder, he thought, and then felt keenly that

  'Murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
  With most miraculous organ.'




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE CITY OF THE CALIPHS--OCTOBER IN THE LAND OF THE PHARAOHS.

Malcolm Skene had been three weeks among 'the flesh-pots of Egypt,'
as he wrote to Roland Lindsay, since he landed from a great white
'trooper' at Alexandria.

It was now nearly the close of what is called the first season in
that part of the world--that of the inundation of the Nile--which
extends from the first of July to the winter solstice, and when, till
the month preceding Skene's arrival, the whole country appears like
one vast sea, in which the towns and villages rise like so many
islands, and when the air is consequently moist, the mornings and
evenings foggy; and Malcolm thought of what brown October was at home
in his native land, where new vistas of hamlet and valley are seen
through the half-stripped groves, a few hardy apples yet hang in the
orchards, and nests are seen in the hedges where none were seen
before; where the flocks are driven to fold as the dim sunset comes
and the landscape assumes its sober hue, while the call of the
partridge and of the few remaining birds on the low sighing wind,
fall sadly on the ear.  He thought of all this, and of the thick old
woods that sheltered his ancestral home, where Dunnimarle looks down
on the northern shore of the Forth.

He often thought of Hester Maule too, and _why_ she had refused him,
after all--after all he had been half led to hope.

'So--so,' he reflected, 'we shall live out the rest of our lives each
without the other--forgetting and perhaps in time forgot.'

Thought was not dead nor memory faint yet, and he seemed, just then,
to have no object to live for, save to kill both, if possible, amid
any excitement that came to hand, and such was not wanting at that
crisis both in Alexandria and Grand Cairo.

No fighting--though such was expected daily--was going on in the
Upper Province or on its frontier; and to kill time, Skene more than
once resorted to the gambling booths of the Greeks and Italians, as
most of our officers did occasionally--a perilous resource at times,
as the reader will admit, when we describe some of the events
connected with them; and, curious to say, it was amid such scenes
that Malcolm Skene was to hear some startling news of his friends at
Earlshaugh.

Long before this he had 'done' Cairo, and seen all that was to been
seen in that wonderful city, which, though less purely Oriental than
Damascus, yet displays a more lively and varied kind of Oriental life
than Constantinople itself; for there are still to be found the
picturesque scenes and most of the _dramatis personæ_ of the 'Arabian
Nights'--and found side by side with the latest results of nineteenth
century civilization.  'The short quarter of an hour's drive from the
railway station,' says M'Coan, 'transports you into the very world of
the Caliphs--the same as when Noureddin, Abou Shamma, Bedredden
Hassan, Ali Cogia, the Jew Physician, and the rest of them played
their parts any time since or before Saladin.'

A labyrinth of dark and tortuous lanes and alleys is the old city
still--places where two donkeys cannot pass abreast, and the toppling
stories and outshoots shut out the narrowest streak of sky; while the
apparently masquerading crowd below seems unchanged from what it was
when Elliot Warburton wrote of it a quarter of a century ago; 'Ladies
wrapped closely in white veils; women of the lower classes carrying
water on their heads, and only with a long blue garment that reveals
too plainly the exquisite symmetry of the young, and the hideous
deformity of the old; here are camels perched upon by black slaves,
magpied with white napkins round their heads and loins; there are
portly merchants, with turbans and long pipes, smoking on their
knowing-looking donkeys; here an Arab dashes through the crowd at
almost full gallop; or a European, still more haughtily, shoves aside
the pompous-looking bearded throng; now a bridal or circumcising
procession squeezes along, with music; now the running footmen of
some Bey or Pacha endeavour to jostle you to the wall, till they
recognise you as an Englishmen--one of that race whom they think the
devil can't frighten or teach manners to.'

Now the streets and the Esbekeyeh Square are dotted by redcoats; the
trumpets of our Hussars ring out in the Abbassiyeh Barracks; the
drums of our infantry are heard at those of Kasr-el-Nil; and the
pipes of the Highlanders ever and anon waken the echoes of El Kaleh,
or the wondrous citadel of Saladin, with the 'March o' Lochiel,' or
the pibroch of 'Donuill Dhu.'

Skene and his brother-officers enjoyed many a cigar on the low
terrace in front of Shepheard's now historical hotel, under the shade
of the acacia trees, watching the changing crowds in the modern
street, which, with all its splendour, cannot compare with the
picturesqueness of older Cairo; but the dresses are strangely
beautiful, and the whole panorama seems part of a stage, rather than
real life; while among the veiled women, the swarthy men in turban
and tarboosh, the British orderly dragoon clanks past, or groups of
heedless, thoughtless, and happy young officers set forth in open
cabs to have a day at the Pyramids--an institution among our troops
at Cairo--especially early in the day, when the air has that purity
and freshness peculiar to a winter morning in Egypt, and towering
skyward are seen those marvels in stone, of which it has been said,
that 'Time mocks all things, but the Pyramids mock time!' and where
the mighty Sphinx at their base, 'the Father of Terrors,' has its
stony eyes for ever fixed on the desert--the gate of that other
world, where the work of men's hands ends, and Eternity seems to
begin.

At this time several peculiar duties, exciting enough, though not
orthodox soldiering, devolved on the troops, and more than once
Malcolm Skene, as a subaltern, found himself with a part of the
picket aiding the miserable Egyptian police in the now nightly task
of closing and clearing out the _Assommoirs_ and _Brasseries_,
gambling and other dens, which were kept open with flaring lamps till
gun-fire--a task often achieved by the fixed bayonet and clubbed
rifle; and in the course of these duties he had more than once come
unpleasantly in almost personal contact with Pietro Girolamo, a
leading promoter and frequenter of such places, and one of the
greatest ruffians in Cairo or Alexandria, under what is now known as
the _Band_ system.

One result of the leniency shown to the followers of Arabi Pacha, who
were allowed to escape or disperse after Tel-el-Kebir, was a flooding
of the country with armed banditti, by whom some districts were
absolutely devastated, and with whom it was suspected that the native
authorities were in league, as the police always disappeared with a
curious rapidity whenever they were most required.  A 'Flying
Commission' was appointed to deal with these brigands, but without
much avail, though certainly some were captured, tried, and
hanged--even on the Shoubra Road, the 'Rotten Row' of the fashionable
Cairenes.

The _Band_ system, in which Pietro Girolamo figured so prominently,
is a murdering one by no means stamped out by the presence even of
our army of occupation, and is a result of the pernicious habit of
carrying weapons among the lower class of Greeks and Italians; thus
scarcely a week passes without a stabbing affray.

In the Esbekeyeh Gardens, outside the theatre, some high words passed
one evening about a girl _artiste_, during one of the _entr'actes_,
between an Italian and Girolamo, who laid the former dead by one blow
of his poniard.  For this he was tried before his Consulate and
merely punished by a nominal fine, while nightly the actress appeared
on the stage, draped in black for her lover, to sing her comic songs.

'Cairo and all the large towns' (says the _Globe_) 'are infested by
the refuse of the Levant--hordes of Greeks of the criminal class and
of the most desperate character, with no more respect for the
sanctity of human life than a Thug.  These men come here to spoil
Egypt, and some of them are, in addition, retained by private persons
as bullies, if not assassins.  Appeal to the Greek Consul, and he
will tell you that he can do nothing in regard to these idle and
disorderly characters, though the French, Italian, and German
authorities deport the same class of their own countrymen on the
first complaint.'

The reason of Pietro Girolamo transferring the scene of his life, or
operations, from Alexandria to Cairo was an outrage in which he had
been concerned a year or two before this period.

In a café near the Place des Consuls were two respectable and very
beautiful girls who served as waitresses, till one evening several
carriages drove up and a number of ruffians, armed with yataghan,
pistol, and poniard, entered, and instead of opposing them, every man
in the café made his escape.

'This girl's smiles would inspire a flame in marble!' cried Girolamo,
seizing one of the waitresses, whom his companions carried off to the
Rosetta Gate, where she was savagely treated and left for dead by the
wayside; and--according to a writer in the _Standard_--only one of
her murderers--an Egyptian Bey--was punished by a fine.

'Life is short--what is the use of fussing about anything?' was the
philosophic remark of Pietro Girolamo, who was a native of Cerigo
(the Cythera of classical antiquity), and latterly the 'Botany Bay'
of the Ionian Isles.

All unaware that this personage was in league with the
proprietors--if not actually one--of a handsome roulette saloon, in a
thoroughfare near the Esbekeyeh Gardens--a place from where it was
said no man ever got home alive with his winnings--Malcolm Skene,
then in the mood to do anything to teach him to forget, if possible,
Hester Maule and that night in the conservatory at Earlshaugh, had
spent on hour or so watching the fatal revolving ball, and risking a
few coins thereon, after which he seated himself to enjoy a cigar, a
glass of wine, and a London newspaper, at a little marble table,
under a flower-decorated awning, in front of the edifice.

Malcolm had been deep in the columns of home news, while sipping his
wine from time to time--wine that was not the Mareotic vintage so
celebrated by Strabo and Horace, but of the common espalier trees in
the Delta--before he became aware that he had a companion at his
table similarly engaged, but in the pages of the obnoxious _Bosphore
Egyptien_.

He was a striking and picturesque-looking fellow in the prime and
strength of manhood.  Though somewhat hawk-like in contour, his
features were fine and dark; his eyes and moustache jetty black--the
former keen, and his knitted brows betokened something of a stern and
savage nature.  He was well armed with a handsome poniard and
pistols, and his dress resembled the Hydriote costume, which is
generally of dark material, with wide blue trousers descending as far
as the knee, a loose jacket of brown stuff braided with red, and an
embroidered skull-cap with a gold tassel.

Furtively, above his paper, he had been eyeing from time to time the
unconscious Skene, in whose grave face he was keen enough to trace a
mixture of power and patience, of concentrated thought without gloom;
a face well browned by exposure, a thick dark moustache, and
expression that savoured of the resolution and perfect assurance of
the genuine Briton; by all of which he was no way deterred, as the
picturesque-looking rascal was no other than Pietro Girolamo, the
perpetrator of so many unpunished outrages.

Malcolm Skene was intent on his paper, and read calmly from column to
column, till a start escaped him on his eye catching the following
paragraph:


'Misfortune seems to attend the sporting season at Earlshaugh, in
Fifeshire.  A short time since we had to record the accidental--or
supposed accidental--shooting of one of the guests--a distinguished
young officer; and now we have to add thereto, the mysterious
disappearance of the host, Captain Roland Lindsay, who, when covert
shooting last evening, disappeared, and as yet cannot be traced,
alive or dead.'


Skene started, and for a moment the paper dropped from his hand.

'Dogs dream of bones and fishermen of fish, but what the devil are
you dreaming of?' said a voice in rather tolerable English, and
Malcolm found himself seated face to face with Pietro Girolamo!

With an unmistakable expression of annoyance and disdain, if not
positive disgust in his face, Skene rose to leave the table, when the
hand of the other was lightly laid on his arm, and Pietro said with
mock suavity;

'The Signor will make his apologies?'

'For what?' asked Malcolm bluntly.

'Permitting his English paper to touch my boot just now.'

'Absurd; I merely dropped it,' said Malcolm Skene, turning away and
about to look at the paragraph again.

'You must, you shall apologize!' cried the Levantine bully, his
sparkling eyes flaming and his pale cheek reddening with rage and
rancour.

'This is outrageous.  Stand back, fellow!' cried Malcolm, laying his
left hand on the scabbard of his sword to bring the hilt handy.

'I mean what I say, Signor,' cried the Greek, snatching away the
paper and treading it under foot.

'And so do I,' replied Malcolm, making a forward stride.

The hand of the Greek was wandering to the poniard in his girdle.
Malcolm knew that in another moment it would be out; but, disdaining
to draw his sword in an open thoroughfare and upon such an adversary,
he clenched his right hand and dealt him, straight out from the
shoulder, a blow fairly under the left ear that stretched him
senseless in a heap on the pavement beside the marble table.

Thinking that he had sufficiently punished the fellow's overbearing
insolence, Malcolm, with his usually quiet blood at fever heat,
muttering with a grim laugh, 'That was not a bad blow for a
kail-supper of Fife,' was turning away to leave the spot, when a
dreadful uproar in the café behind him made him pause, and hearing
shouts for succour in English he at once re-entered it.

There he found a number of Europeans and of British officers--chiefly
middies--who had come by rail from Alexandria for a 'spree' in the
city of the Caliphs, engaged in a fierce _mêlée_ with a number of
those ruffians who frequent such places.

The vicinity of the wretched roulette-table had been very much
crowded, and a dozen or so of these thoughtless young Britons, who
could not get near enough to stake their money personally, had been
passing it on from one to another to stake it on the colours.  A
trivial dispute had occurred, and then a Greek ruffian, who was well
known to be a terror to every gambling saloon, rushed forward with
his cocked revolver, savagely resolute, and demanded as his, 'every
piastre--yea, every para on the tables'--a demand not at all uncommon
by such persons in such places.  Greeks came in from all points,
armed with cudgels and poniards, and in a moment a battle-royal
ensued.  The roulette-table was overturned, the chairs smashed, and
bloodshed became plain on every hand.

While plunging into the _mêlée_ to rescue more than one lad in peril,
Malcolm Skene towered above them all, in his herculean strength; and
as he laid about him with a cudgel he had found, there floated
through his mind a sense of rage and mortification at what Hester
Maule would think if he perished in a brawl so obscure and
disreputable.

'Take, cut, and burn!' was the cry of the Greek, a local laconism,
signifying 'take their money, burn their houses, cut their throats!'

'Kill the Frankish dogs, these smokers and pilaff eaters!' shouted
Girolamo, who had now gathered himself up and plunged into the fray,
intent only on putting his poniard into Skene.

But the latter, now relinquishing the cudgel, achieved the feat which
afterwards found its way into more than one British print.

From the gambling saloon there was only one issue, down a narrow
passage, in which a number of the rabble had taken post on both
sides, and with knife and club allowed none to pass, so that the
place soon became a species of shamble.  Perceiving this, Malcolm
Skene--bearing back the seething mass of yelling Greeks, Italians,
and Levantine scum, who, with glaring black eyes, set white teeth,
and visages pallid and distorted with avarice and the lust of blood
and cruelty, surged about him with knife and cudgel, impeding and
wounding each other in their frantic efforts to get at him--dragged
up a couple of Greeks, one in each hand, and by sheer dint of
muscular strength lifting them off the floor, and using their bodies
as shields on each side, he charged right through the passage and
gained the street, where he flung them down, gashed and bleeding from
cuts and stabs by the misdirected weapons of their compatriots, while
he escaped almost without a scratch; gathered about him his
companions, all of whom had suffered more or less severely, and
getting cabs they drove to the barracks.

For this affair Pietro Girolamo was arrested in the Shoubra Road, and
brought before the Greek Consul after twenty-four hours'
incarceration in the Zaptieh; but as usual, like all the rogues of
his nationality, he claimed protection under the Alexandrian
Capitulations, and went forth free into the streets again.

Malcolm Skene soon dismissed the row from his thoughts, but not the
newspaper paragraph in the perusal or consideration of which he had
been so roughly interrupted; and he pondered deeply and vainly on
what was involved by the mysterious and alarming--'disappearance at
Earlshaugh.'




CHAPTER XXIV.

JACK ELLIOT'S PERIL.

We have anticipated some of the occurrences referred to in the last
chapter, but shall relate them in their place.

Gathering in an excited group at the scene of the catastrophe, the
sportsmen, keepers, and beaters found Elliot reclining against, or
clinging to the stem of a tree in the old hedge, looking very pale,
with his chest all bloody--at least his shirt dyed crimson, and
divested of his coat and vest, which he had thrown off.

Spared by what he had done, the moment Hawkey Sharpe had seen his
victim fall--the moment his finger had pulled the trigger--the savage
and secret exultation that had filled his heart passed away.

He felt as if on the verge of a giddy precipice, over which he dared
not look; yet he was compelled to confront the scene, and to
proceed--but apparently with lead-laden feet--with the others, to
where his victim was now supported in the arms of Gavin Fowler and
Spens, the beater.

For a minute the intended assassin scarcely seemed to breathe, and to
have but one wish--that the deed were undone, for the hot blood that
prompted it was cool enough now, and the instincts of revenge had
grown dull.  Terror seized his soul, and his gaze wandered in the
air, on the while flying clouds, on the yellow stubble fields and
waving woods; but he nerved himself to approach the startled and
infuriated group, whose menacing eyes were on him; and he nerved
himself also to act a part, or, if not, lose his senses, and with
them, everything.

He felt that beyond cheating, cardsharping, jockeying at horse races,
and peculation at Earlshaugh, he had taken a mighty stride in crime,
and that mingling curiously with his craven fear, there was an insane
recklessness--a wild incoherence about his brain and heart, with a
sickening knowledge that if Captain Elliot died, he--Hawkey
Sharpe--would be _that_ which he dared not name to himself, even in
thought.

Hence his apparent sorrow and compunction seemed, and perhaps were,
genuine _pro tem._, but the outcome of selfishness.

'How in Heaven's name came this to pass--how did it happen?' demanded
Roland, his eyes blazing as he fixed them on Sharpe.

'It was an accident--an entire accident,' faltered the latter.  'The
leaves of a turnip twisted round my right ankle, causing me to
stumble and my rifle to explode.'

'A likely thing,' growled Jamie Spens, the beater, with a scowl in
his eyes.  'Ye were oot o' the belt o' neeps at the time; but I've
aye thocht ye wad pot some puir devil, as ye have done the Captain.'

'Silence, you poaching----,' began Sharpe in a furious voice; but
Roland interrupted him.

'Stand back, sir.  This is no time for words.  "Accident," you say.
To me it seems a piece of cowardly revenge--a case for the police and
the Procurator-Fiscal.'

At these words Hawkey Sharpe grew, if possible, paler still, as they
were the echoes of his own fears, and drew sullenly back.

'My poor, dear fellow--Elliot--Jack,' exclaimed Roland, kneeling down
by his friend's side, 'are you much hurt--tell me?'

'I cannot say,' replied Elliot faintly.  'I feel as if my breast was
scorched with fire--the charge, or some of it, seems thereabout.'
Then, after a pause, he added in a husky voice: 'This horrible
accident is most inopportune, when my leave is running out, and I am
so soon due at headquarters.'

'Don't bother about that, dear Jack, I'll make all that
right--meantime your hurt must be instantly seen to.  Jamie Spens,
run, as if for your life, my man, to the stables; get a good horse
from Buckle, and ride to Cupar on the spur for the doctors--send a
couple, at least.'

'Let me--let me go!' urged Hawkey Sharpe, in a breathless voice.

'You--be hanged!' cried old Fowler, who, like all the people on and
about the estate, hated the tyrannical steward.

So the ex-poacher was away on his errand--speeding across the fields
like a hare.

'Now, my lads,' cried Roland, after having, with soldier-like
promptitude, secured a handkerchief folded as a pad, by another torn
into bandages, across the wound; 'quick with that iron hurdle,'
pointing to one in a gap of the hedge; 'hand it here to form a
litter.'

Roland, like Elliot, had faced danger and death too often to be made
a woman by it now, and his eyes seemed stern and fearless as he gave
one long, steady, and withering glance at the cowering and
white-faced Hawkey Sharpe; then he took off his coat, an example
others were not slow in following, to make as soft a couch as
possible of the iron hurdle, which four stout fellows lifted, as soon
as the sufferer was laid thereon, and the sorrowful procession, which
Hester from the window had seen approaching, set out for Earlshaugh.

'Fules shouldna hae chappin' sticks!  I kent how it wad be wi' some
o' us,' muttered old Gavin Fowler, as he sharply drew his cartridges,
and unaware of Hawkey Sharpe's secret motives for action, added,
'Maister Roland, he has nearly made cauld meat o' me mair than ance;
but ne'er again--ne'er again will I beat the coveys wi' him.  It is
as muckle as your life's worth!'

Slowly the shooting party wended their way, by field and hedgerow,
towards the mansion-house; and, with his heart full of bitter and
vengeful, if vague, thoughts, Roland strode by that blood-stained
litter, thinking of the time when he had seen Jack Elliot similarly
borne from the field of Tel-el-Kebir.

Seeing the deep commiseration of Roland, Elliot attempted to smile,
and said:

'You know, perhaps, the old Spanish proverb--that a soldier had
better smell of _polvora rancho de Santa Barbara_, than of musk or
lavender.'

'But not in this fashion, Jack, at the hands of a blundering cad--if
a blunder it was!'

The bearers had some distance to traverse, as the park stretched for
a couple of miles around them, wooded and undulating, crossed by a
broad silvery burn or stream, that flowed through the haugh, and past
the Weird Yett to the hamlet of Earlshaugh.

Their arrival at the house elicited a shout of dismay from Tom
Trotter, whose nerves were not of the strongest order, and
consternation spread from the drawing-room to the servants' hall and
from thence to the stable court, with many exaggerated reports of the
very awkward part the obnoxious Mr. Hawkey Sharpe--for obnoxious he
was to all--had played in the catastrophe; while the anguish of
Maude, her suspicion and her loathing of the latter, may be imagined,
as Elliot was borne past her to his rooms.

On hearing of an accident, neither Annot nor Hester had thought of
Captain Elliot.  The first dread of the former--a selfish one, we
fear, and of the latter, a purer one, certainly--was for Roland
Lindsay, who, accustomed to bloodshed, wounds, and suffering, was to
all appearance singularly cool and collected.

'Don't be alarmed, Maudie, darling,' said he, endeavouring to look
cheerful, as he drew his terrified sister almost forcibly aside;
'Jack will be all right in a few days.'

'But what--oh, what has happened?'

'He has been hit--shot--wounded, I mean--that is all, by Hawkey
Sharpe, or some other duffer.'

'Oh, Roland, why did you have that horrid fellow to shoot with you?
But need I ask why--we can help nothing now!  But Jack--my
darling--my darling!' she added with a torrent of tears; 'I had a
presentiment--I knew something would happen, and it _has_ happened!
Oh heavens, Roland, our position here seems overstrained and
unnatural.  Would that we were out of Earlshaugh and his power!'

'Maude?  Our father's house!'

'Our father's house no more.'

'That is as may be,' replied Roland, through his set teeth.

Meanwhile the author of all this dismay ascended the turret-stairs to
his 'sanctum' and betook him without delay, with tremulous hands and
chattering teeth, to a stiff and tall rummer of brandy and soda to
steady his nerves, gather Dutch courage, and prepare to face the
worst, while muttering as if to excuse himself.

'An insult of the sort he gave me can never be forgotten!' and he
rubbed his right ear, which seemed yet to be conscious of Jack's
finger and thumb when used by the latter as a fulcrum to twist him
round; while, to do her justice, his sister Deborah grew paler than
ever, and seemed on the point of sinking when she heard of what had
occurred.

'It was all an accident--a horrible accident, Deb,' said he, an
assertion to which he stuck vigorously; 'my ankle got twisted in a
turnip shaw, don't you see--anyhow, don't get up your
agitation-of-the-heart business just now, for my nerves may not stand
it.'

She eyed him coldly--almost sternly, and not as she was wont to do;
she read his real fear, and knew the full value of his sham
contrition, and that it was born of alarm for himself; but his
courage rose, and his secret wrath and hate returned apace, when the
doctors, after a consultation and much pulling of nether lips, with
also much mysterious and technical jargon, declared that the wound
was not a serious one, though some of the charge (No. 5), which had
crossed Jack's chest transversely, went perilously near the heart;
and that unless suppuration took place, his constitution was so fine
'he would soon pull through.'

The doubt that he might _not_, or that a relapse might ensue, proved
too much just then for the nerves of Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, who resolved
on taking his departure for a time.

'And you go--for where, Hawkey?' asked his sister, not surprised that
he should suddenly remember an engagement.

'To the western meeting--they make such a fuss over this accident,
and you know I hate fuss.  Besides, I have a pot of money on the
Welter Cup, and if I lose----'

'Well?'

'Well--why, the timber of that old King's Wood may come to the
hammer--that's all, Deb,' said he, as confidently as if it were his
own.


'Now, girls, don't be foolish,' said Roland, in reply to the
entreaties of Maude and Hester--the former especially--to be
permitted to visit Jack, who was now abed, and in the hands of an
accredited nurse.

'Why--may not I see him?' pled Maude.

'Not yet, certainly,' replied Roland, caressing her sunny brown hair,
and patting her cheek, from which the faint rose tint was fled.

'I must see him, Roland, that I may know he is not--not--dead.

'Dead, you dear little goose!  Such fellows as Jack Elliot take a
long time in dying.  You should have seen him as I did (though it is
well, however, you did not), when doubled up by a grape-shot at
Tel-el-Kebir.  He'll be all right in a day or two, and meanwhile--

'What, Roland?' asked the trembling girl.

'I go to Edinburgh, to get at the real state of our affairs, what or
however they may be; I feel inclined to shoot that fellow Sharpe like
a dog if he crosses my path again at Earlshaugh!'

'Roland, Roland, you surely know all?' said his sister with intense
sadness.

'No, I do not know all,' said he, drawing her head on his breast and
caressing her; and feeling keenly that their father's roof was
degraded by the presence of this fellow, after attempting such a
crime--for a crime Roland felt and knew it to be; albeit that the
perpetrator was the brother of their father's widow, and should, but
for cogent reasons, be handed over to the mercies of the
Procurator-Fiscal for the county.

By the very outrage he had committed, Sharpe had excited all the
tenderness and commiseration for Elliot of which Maude's nature was
capable, and for himself all the loathing and detestation which her
usually gentle heart could feel.  Thus he had lost much and won
nothing; and notwithstanding his sister's position, influence, and
interest at Earlshaugh, he felt himself very much _de trop_; and,
unable to face the heavy fire of obloquy and blame that met him on
every hand, he feigned the excuse--if such were wanting--of having to
attend the Ayr races, which came off about that time, and departed
ostensibly for the great western meeting on that famous course which
lies southward of the ancient town of Ayr.  His farewell words to his
sister were:

'I'll be even with Roland Lindsay yet--yes, more than even, as you
shall see, Deb!'

Whether he really went there was apocryphal, as he was seen ere long
hovering about the vicinity of Earlshaugh, if not in the house itself.

And Hawkey Sharpe never did anything without a prime or ulterior
object in view.

The event we have narrated marred the partridge shooting at
Earlshaugh for a time; and as lately quite a crop of dances and
drums, garden and music parties had sprung up in the vicinity, and
attendance at these was marred too, Annot Drummond felt more
exasperation than commiseration at the cause thereof.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE WILL.

In the pursuit of personal information, which should have been in his
possession before, that somewhat too easy-going young soldier, Roland
Lindsay, in the course of a day or two, found himself in the 'Gray
Metropolis of the North,' or rather in that portion thereof which has
sprung up within the last hundred and forty years or so.

The office of Mr. M'Wadsett, W.S., was amid a number of such 'wasps'
nests,' in a small and rather gloomy and depressing arena known as
Thistle Court, under the shadow of St. Andrew's great, sombre, and
circular-shaped church.

The situation was a good one for a prosperous town lawyer's office,
and Mr. M'Wadsett was a prosperous--and, as usual with many of them,
effusively pious--lawyer, and all about him, whether by chance or
design, was arranged to give clients--victims many deemed
themselves--an impression that his practice was wide, select, and
respectable--intensely respectable--while Mr. M'Wadsett never omitted
church services at least twice daily, for the kirk was his
fetish--the test of a decorous life, like his black suit and white
necktie.

He was busily engaged just then, so Roland sent in his card and had
to wait, which he felt as a kind of hint that he was not so important
a client now as he might have been.  The room he was ushered into was
a dull one, overlooking the gloomy court; and slowly the time seemed
to pass, for Roland was in an agony of impatience now to know the
worst--the profound folly of his father, for whom his feelings just
then were, to say the least of them, of a somewhat mingled cast.

Mr. M'Wadsett's office consisted of several rooms--the interior and
upper floors of an old-fashioned house.  In one of these, partly
furnished like a parlour, the walls hung with fly-blown maps and
prospectuses--a waiting-room--Roland was left to fume and 'cool his
heels'; while in one somewhere adjacent he heard a curious clashing
of fire-irons, and a voice giving the--to him--somewhat familiar
words of command, but in a suppressed tone:

'Guard--point--two!  Low guard--point--two!' etc., for it was evident
that some of the clerks who were rifle volunteers were having a
little bayonet exercise, till a bell rang, when they all vaulted upon
their stools and began to write intensely, for then the voice of old
Mr. M'Wadsett was heard, and Roland was ushered into his presence.

His room was snug and cosy, albeit its principal furniture consisted
of green charter boxes on iron frames, all of which held secrets
relating to the families whose well-known names were displayed upon
them.  How much, indeed, did he not know about all the leading
proprietors of Fife and Kinross?

He received his visitor warmly and pleasantly enough, spoke of the
war in Egypt, his health, the weather, of course, and then when a
pause ensued, Roland stated the object for which he had come.

The lawyer, a fussy little man, with a sharp, keen manner, and sharp,
keen gray eyes, raised his silver-rimmed glasses above his bushy
white eyebrows, and said:

'My dear sir, I sent a copy of your respected father's will to Egypt.'

'Addressed to me?'

'Yes.'

'I never got it.'

'Why?'

'We were holding the lines in front of Ramleh at that time; the Arabs
made free with the mail-bags, and lit their pipes with the contents,
no doubt, in the desert beyond Ghizeh.'

'My dear sir, how lawless of them!'

'I have thought about this will at times, till I have become
stupid--woolly in fact, and hated the name of it.'

'Your good father--

'Ah,' interrupted Roland, a little testily, 'I fear we only looked
upon him latterly as the family banker, and he was useful in that
way--very.'

'To your brother in the Guards perhaps too much so,' said the lawyer
gravely.

'Well--about the cursed document itself?' began Roland a little
impetuously.

'Strong language, my dear sir--strong language!  The terms of your
respected father's will are, I must say, a little peculiar, and were
framed much against my advice; though his old family agent, I
scarcely felt justified in drawing out the document.'

'I have heard that its conditions are outrageous.'

'They are--my dear sir--they are.'

'Such as no respectable lawyer should have drawn up,' said Roland
sternly.

'Captain Lindsay, there you are wrong--severe--but I excuse you,'
replied Mr. M'Wadsett, perking up his bald, shining head, as he drew
the document in question from a charter box, after some trouble in
finding the key thereof, and which Roland eyed--without touching
it--with a very gloomy and louring expression.

'Dear me--dear me,' muttered M'Wadsett, as, seating himself in a
well-stuffed circular chair, and adjusting his spectacles, he glanced
over the document.  'He wrote: "I have delayed making my will so long
as I have thought it safe to do so, but I am an old man now, and the
gross and wilful extravagance of----"  Shall I read it all, Captain
Lindsay?  The first few clauses are unimportant enough: £1,000 to Sir
Harry Maule; some jewellery to his daughter Hester--bequests to the
servants--Funnell the butler, Buckle the head groom, and then with
the provisions appointed for your sister and yourself----'

'Comes the "crusher," I suppose,' interrupted Roland, crashing his
right heel on the floor.

'Precisely so, my dear sir; I don't wonder that you feel it; but
listen and I shall read it all.'

'Please don't,' cried Roland; 'lawyers make everything so lengthy, so
elaborate, so full of circumlocution and irritating repetition.  Cut
it short--the gist of it.'

'Is--that all the estates, real and personal, are devised and
bequeathed by the testator to his wife, Deborah Sharpe or Lindsay.'

'For life?

'No--to do with as she pleases in all time coming; the whole power of
willing everything away is left in her hands, as you may read for
yourself here.'

There was a silence of a minute.

'I thought such episodes--such outrages--never happened but in
novels?' said Roland.

The lawyer smiled faintly and shook his head, and refolding the
document, said:

'It is, of course, duly recorded.'

'And Earlshaugh will go to her heirs?'

'To Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, unless she devises otherwise.'

'A bitter satire!'

'A codicil was framed, or nearly so, revoking much that had gone
before; but was never signed.  By that omission----'

'I have lost all,' said Roland, starting to his feet; 'so the
fortunes of the Lindsays of Earlshaugh are at their lowest ebb.'

'Unless you can find an heiress,' said the lawyer, with another of
his weak smiles.

Annot was no heiress, Roland remembered.

'As for my father's folly,' he was beginning bitterly, when M'Wadsett
touched his arm:

'Let us not speak ill of the dead,' said he; 'the late Laird may have
been deceived, misled--let us not wrong him.'

'But he has wronged the living, who have to feel--to endure and to
suffer!'

'The folly of your brother, the Guardsman--rather than your
own--brought all this about, Captain Lindsay,' said the lawyer,
rising too, as if the unprofitable interview had come to an end; and,
a few minutes after, Roland found himself outside in the bustle and
sunshine of George Street, that broad, stately, and magnificent
thoroughfare, along which he wandered like one in a bad dream, and
full of vague, angry, and bitter thoughts.

A deep sense of unmerited humiliation galled his naturally proud
spirit, now that the truth of his real position had been laid before
him without doubt.

The 'fool's paradise' in which he had been partly living had
vanished; and he thought how much better it had been had he left his
bones at Tel-el-Kebir, at Kashgate, or anywhere else in Egypt, as so
many of his comrades had done.

What was he to do now?

His profession at least was left him.  Would he return to his
regiment at once, and go to Earlshaugh no more?  It was impossible
just yet to turn his back on what was once his home.  There was
Annot, his _fiancée_; there was Maude, his sister; there were Jack
Elliot and other guests; before them a part must be acted as yet--and
then--what then--what next?

A bitter malediction rose to his lips, but he stifled it.

Once matters were somehow smoothed over, back to the regiment he
should, of course, go, and turning his back on Scotland for ever, try
to forget the past and everything!

With incessant iteration the thought--the question--was ever before
him how to explain to Jack Elliot and Annot Drummond that he--Roland
Lindsay, deemed the heir, the Lord of Earlshaugh and all its acres of
wood and wold, field and pasture, was little better than an
outcast--admitted there on the sufferances of the sister of that most
pitiful wretch, Hawkey Sharpe!

Viewed in every way the situation was maddening--intolerable.  With
regard to Annot, he could but trust to her love now.  Should he ask
Maude or Hester to break the matter to her gently?  No--that task
must be his own.

Most of the hopes of himself and his sister seemed to be based on the
goodwill that might be borne them by Deborah Sharpe (how he loathed
to think of her as Mrs. Lindsay), and she, too, evidently, was
inimical to them both, and under the complete influence of her
brother, Hawkey Sharpe.

Amid the turmoil of his thoughts he did not forget to procure as a
souvenir of this wretched visit to Edinburgh a valuable bracelet for
Annot Drummond, and then took his way--homeward he could not deem
it--to Earlshaugh.

He had but one crumb of consolation, that at the last hour his father
seemed to have repented the evil he had done him--at the last
hour--but too late!

'Not always in life is it possible to unravel the mesh which our
fingers have woven,' says a writer.  'Sometimes it is permitted to
recall the lost opportunities of a few mistaken hours; sometimes,
when all too late, we would willingly buy back with every drop of our
heart's blood the moments we have so wilfully abused, and the chances
we have so foolishly neglected.  But it is too late!'

So it was too late when Roland's father thought to amend his fatal
will.




CHAPTER XXVI.

MOLOCH.

While Roland's mind was agitated by a nervous dread of how to break
to the ambitious little Annot--for ambitious he knew her to be--the
real state of his position and his altered fortune, unknown to him,
and in his absence, that young lady was receiving an inkling of how
matters stood, and thus, when the time came, some trouble and pain
were saved him.

Red-eyed, and apparently inconsolable for his absence for a single
day, the 'gushing' Annot had cast her society almost entirely upon
Hester, as Maude was too much occupied by her own thoughts and cares
to give her sympathy.

'Why has he gone, why left me so soon after we came here?' she moaned
for the twentieth time, with her golden head reclined on Hester's
shoulder.  'What shall I do without him?' she added.

'For a few hours only.  What will you say when winter comes or
spring, and he is back in Egypt, if you think so much of a few hours
now?'

'It is very silly of me, I suppose, but I cannot help it; but we have
never been separated since--since----'

'You met at Merlwood,' said Hester coldly, and annoyed by the other's
acting or childishness, she scarcely knew which it was.  She added,
'Business has taken him to Edinburgh.'

'Business--he never told me!  About what?'

'Something very unpleasant, I fear; but you know that a man of
property--

Hester paused, not knowing very well how to parry the questions of
Annot, who had put them to her frequently, and for a few minutes they
promenaded together the long flowery aisles of the conservatory in
silence.

Hester was so tall and straight, so proud-looking and yet so soft and
womanly, her bearing a thing of beauty in itself, her dark velvety
eyes so sensitive and sweet in expression that anyone might wonder
how Annot Drummond, with all her fair and fairy-like loveliness, had
lured Roland away from her, yet it was so.

Now and then, oftener than she wished, there came back unbidden to
Hester's mind memories of those happy August evenings at Merlwood,
ere Annot came, when she and Roland wandered in the leafy dingles by
the Esk, by 'caverned Hawthornden' and Roslin's ruin-crowned rock;
and when these memories came she strove to stifle them, as if they
caused a pain in her heart, for such haunting day-dreams were full of
tenderness, a vanished future and a present sense of keen
disappointment.

And she remembered well, though she never sang now, the old song he
loved so well, and which went to the air of the 'Bonnie Briar Bush':

  'The visions of the buried past
    Come thronging, dearer far
  Than joys the present hour can give,
    Than present objects are.'

And she felt with a sigh that her past was indeed buried and done
with.

Honest and gentle, Hester had long since felt that she was unequal to
cope with Annot Drummond, or the game the latter played--a damsel who
possessed, as a clever female writer says, 'all the thousand and one
tricks, in short, by which an artificial woman understands how to lay
herself out for the attraction and capture of that noble beast of
prey called man;' and Annot was indeed artificial to the tips of her
tiny fingers.

'Hester,' said Annot, breaking the silence mentioned, and following
some thoughts of her own, 'have you never had dreams--day-dreams, I
mean--of being rich?'

'I don't think so.'

'Why is this?'

'Because I am quite content; and when one is so there is no more to
be desired.  As our proverb says: "Content is nae bairn o' wealth."'

'I cannot understand your point of view,' said Annot.  'I should like
gorgeous dresses--Worth's best; fine horses, with skins like satin,
and glittering harness; stately carriages, such as we see in the
parks; tall footmen, well-liveried and well-matched; a house in Park
Lane----'

'And lots of poor to feed?'

'I never think of them--they can take care of themselves, if the
police don't.'

'Oh, Annot!'

'And I should like my wedding presents to be the wonder of all, and
duly catalogued in all the 'Society' papers--services in exquisite
silver, the épergne of silver and gold--spoons and forks without
number--ice buckets and biscuit boxes--coffee sets in Dresden china,
écru, and gold--toilette suites in crystal and gold--Russian sables,
fans, gloves, jewels--a Cashmere shawl from the Queen, of course--a
lovely suite of diamonds and opals from the brother-officers of the
bridegroom--shoals of letters of congratulation, and a present with
each!'

'In all this you say nothing of love,' said Hester, with a curl on
her sweet red lip, 'and without it all these things were worthless.'

'And without them it were useless,' replied the mercenary little
beauty, with a perfect coolness that kindled an emotion of something
akin to contempt rather than amusement in the breast of Hester.

'As Claude Melnotte says, after describing his palace by the Lake of
Como, "Dost like the picture?"' asked Annot laughingly.

'Not at all from your point of view,' replied Hester, a little
wearily.  'The diamond and opal suite, to be the gift of the
bridegroom's brother-officers, has reference, I suppose----'

'To Roland, of course.'

'Poor Roland!' said Hester, with a genuine sigh.

'Why do you adopt that tone in regard to him?' asked Annot, her eyes
of bright hazel green dilating with surprise.

'For reasons of which, I fear, you know nothing,' replied Hester,
unable to repress a growing repugnance for the questioner.

'But I surely must know them in time?'

'Perhaps.'

'There is no "perhaps" in the matter,' said Annot pettishly; 'what do
you mean, Hester--speak?'

'Is it possible,' said the other with extreme reluctance, 'that you
have never heard of the terms of his father's will?'

'Scotch-like, you reply to one question by another.  Well, what will?'

'His father's most singular and unjust one.'

'No.'

'Not even from Roland?'

'No--never, I say!'

'Most strange!'

'You know that I cannot speak of it.'

'Of course not.'

'But mamma may.  This estate of Earlshaugh----'

'Is the property by gift of his father to his second wife----'

'That grim woman, Deborah Sharpe?'

'Yes--to have and to hold--I don't know the exact terms.'

'How should you?' said Annot incredulously.  'You cannot be much of a
lawyer, Hester!'

'Of course not--but this is not a lawyer's question now.'

'Why?'

'The will is an accomplished fact.  Roland, when abroad, may have
been misled--nay, has been misled--by words and delusive hopes; but
these the family agent will shatter when he shows him the truth.'

Annot made no immediate reply to a startling statement, which she
suspected was merely the outcome of natural female jealousy, and
perhaps rancour in the heart of Hester Maule.  But the memory of the
latter went too distinctly back to that mournful day at Earlshaugh
when the last laird had been borne to his last home on the shoulders
of his serving men, while Roland was in Egypt, and poor Maude too ill
to leave her own room; the solemn and substantial luncheon that was
laid in the dining-hall for all who attended the funeral, and of the
subsequent reading of the will by Mr. M'Wadsett in the Red
Drawing-room to that listening group, over whom lay the hush and the
shadow of selfish anticipation; the legacies to faithful old
servants, those to her father, to herself, and other relations; and
then the terrible clause which bequeathed to 'his well-beloved wife
and ministering angel of his later days' everything else of which the
testator died possessed.  And then followed the buzz of astonishment
and dissatisfaction with which the sombre assembly broke up.

Of these details Hester said nothing to Annot; but the latter had now
something _to reflect upon_, which was too distasteful for
consideration, and which she endeavoured resolutely to set aside.

Sooth to say, her selfish delight in the solid, luxurious, and
baronial glories of Earlshaugh was too great to be easily dissipated,
and she had still, as ever, a decided, repugnance to the
recollections of her widowed mother's struggles with limited means;
and their somewhat sordid home in South Belgravia, as she sought
courageously to shut her bright eyes to the gruesome probabilities of
Hester's communication.

With a sigh of sorrow, in which, notwithstanding the gentleness of
her nature, much of contempt was mingled, Hester Maule regarded her
town-bred cousin, who though apparently so volatile and thoughtless,
was quite a watchful little woman of the world, with what seemed
childish ways, and Hebe-like beauty, so fair, so soft, with rose-leaf
complexion, and her _petite_ face peeping forth, as it were, from
among the coils and masses of her wonderful golden hair; and yet she
was ever ready to sacrifice everything to society--that Moloch to
which so many now sacrifice purity, happiness, and life itself.

For Annot believed in a union of hands and lands, with hearts left
out of the compact.




CHAPTER XXVII.

ANNOT'S MISGIVINGS.

Jack Elliot's mishap--accident though it could scarcely be
called--thoroughly marred and shortened the partridge shooting at
Earlshaugh, and the birds had quite a holiday of it.

'Never mind, Jack,' Roland had said on his departure for Edinburgh,
'you'll make amends when the pheasants are ready.'

Irritated by the event which had struck him down--exasperated by the
whole affair, the secret motives for which had gradually become more
apparent to him, Elliot tossed on his bed feverishly and wearily, at
times scarcely conscious, in a sleepy trance, for he had lost much
blood; but being a tough fellow, with a splendid constitution, he
soon became convalescent, after the few grains of No. 5 that lodged
had been picked out by the doctors.

Feverishly he called for cooling draughts, which were always at hand,
prepared by old Mrs. Drugget, the buxom housekeeper, and even by
grim, grave Mrs. Lindsay, whom the catastrophe had seriously startled
and upset, as it showed the cruelty, cunning, and devilish villany of
which her brother and _protégé_ was capable.

Mrs. Drugget, influenced by Jack's love of Maude, whom she had known
from infancy, scarcely left the patient for an instant, and ever sat
motionless and watchful by his bedside, till he was safe, and in the
way of a rapid recovery.

Many were the calls to know the progress of the invalid, whose
'accident' had made some noise and excited much speculation;
carriages were always rolling up to the _porte-cochère_, the great
iron bell of which was clanged incessantly, and on the same errand
horsemen came cantering across the park; and one thing seemed
certain, that, until the party then assembled at Earlshaugh left the
place, Mr. Hawkey Sharpe would not show himself there in the field,
nor under the roof of the house, it was confidently supposed.

Ere long Elliot was promoted from jellies and beef-tea to chicken and
champagne, administered by the loving little white hands of Maude;
and, with such a nurse, it seemed not a bad thing to lie convalescent
to one like Jack, who had undergone enteric fever in the hospital at
Ismailia, by the Lake of Tismah, and later still in the huts at
Quarantine Island, by the burning shore of Suakim.

Maude grew bright and merry; she had got over the shock; but yet had
in her heart all the terror and loathing it could feel for the hand
that had dealt the injury--an injury which, but for the scandal it
must have caused in the county generally, and in the 'East Neuk' in
particular, might have been made a very serious matter for Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe.

Actuated by some judicious remarks from the old Writer to the Signet
of Thistle Court, Roland returned to Earlshaugh with the intention of
endeavouring to 'tide over' the humiliation and difficulties of his
position till he could turn his back upon that place for ever,
without making any more unpleasantness, and, more than all, giving
rise to any useless speculation or _esclandre_.

Mrs. Lindsay had somehow heard of his sudden, but certainly not
unexpected, visit to Edinburgh, and divined its object, if indeed no
casual rumour had reached her about it; and a smile of derision and
triumph, that would greatly have pleased her obnoxious brother, stole
over her pale and usually calm face when she thought of the utter
futility of Roland's expedition; and something of this emotion in her
eyes was the response to his somewhat crest-fallen aspect when she
met him in the Red Drawing-room on his return.

But he was master of himself, if he was master of nothing more, and
resolved to have a truce, if not a treaty of peace, with 'Deborah
Sharpe,' as he and Maude always called her in her absence.

Strange to say, he found that, outwardly at least, her old animosity,
jealousy, and spirit of defiance were much lessened, though he knew
not the secret cause thereof; but she was a woman, and as he looked
on the deathly pallor of her face, the ill-concealed agitation of her
manner, and thought of the terrible secret disease under which she
laboured, he felt something of pity for her, that was for the time
both genuine and generous.

'You look pale,' said he gently as he took her hand and led her to a
sofa, adjusting a cushion at her back; 'I hope you have not been
exciting yourself about the state of my friend Elliot; Jack will be
all right in a few days now.'

The soft grace of his manner and sweetness of his tone (common to him
when addressing all women) impressed her greatly; her own brother,
Hawkey Sharpe, never spoke thus, even when seeking his incessant
monetary favours.  If the latter watched her pallor or detected
illness, his observation was rendered acute, not by fraternal
tenderness, but by selfishness and ulterior views of his own; thus
Roland's bearing vanquished, for a time at least, her innate dislike
of him, for it is an idiosyncrasy in the hearts of many to dislike
and fear those they have wronged or supplanted.

Thus Roland was superior to her.

'A more glorious victory cannot be gained over another than this,'
says Tillotson; 'when the injury began on their part, the kindness
should begin on ours.'

'I hope you have secured medical advice as to the state of your
health?' said he after a little pause, and with a nameless courtesy
in his attitude.

'Thank you so much for your kindness, Roland.'  (She usually called
him 'Captain Lindsay.')  'Just now you remind me so much of your
father; and this is the anniversary of the day when he met with his
terrible accident, and his horse threw him,' she added, looking not
at him, but past him; yet the woman's usually hard disposition was
suddenly moved by the touch of nature that 'makes the whole world
kin.'

'Like my father, you think?' said Roland coldly.

'Yes--and for _his_ sake it is perhaps not too late--too late----'

'For what?' he asked, as her lip quivered and she paused.

'Time will show,' she replied, as one of her spasms made her lip
quiver again, and her breath came short and heavily.

'Is there anything Maude or I can do for you--speak, please?' said
Roland, starting up.

'Nothing--but do give me your arm to the door of my own room, and
ring for Mrs. Drugget.'

He gave her his escort tenderly and courteously; and thus ended a
brief interview--the first pleasant one he had ever had with 'the
usurper' of his patrimony, and which he was to recall at a future
time.

Whether or not Annot Drummond was thinking over Hester's cloudy and
alarming communications it is difficult to say; but she said to the
latter after a most effusive meeting with her _fiancé_:

'What _has_ come over Roland since his visit to Edinburgh?  He looks
shockingly ill--so changed--so _triste_--what does it all mean?'

'I told you he went there on business, and that seems to have always
its worries--all the greater, perhaps, to those who detest or know
nothing about it.'

'His moodiness quite belies the sobriquet of his name--"The Lindsays
lightsome and gay;" but here he comes again.  Roland,' she added,
springing up and kissing his cheek, 'a thousand thanks, darling, for
this lovely bracelet you have brought me.  It was so kind--so like
you to remember poor little me!'

'As if I could, even for a moment, forget,' was his half-maudlin
response, while she drew up her sleeve a little way, coquetishly
displaying a lovely arm of snowy whiteness, firmly and roundly
moulded by perfect health and youth, with the bracelet clasped on her
slender wrist; and while turning it round and round, so as to inspect
it in every light and from every point of view, she was thinking that
when--after the bestowal of so many other valuable gifts--he could
bring her a jewel so expensive as this, surely Hester's hints about
_the will_ must have been nonsense, or the outcome of jealousy at
her--Annot's--success with a handsome cousin, whom she knew that
Hester was at least well disposed to regard with interest.

Yet, when she and Roland were together, to Annot's watchful eyes his
manner did seem thoughtful and absent at times, and would have caused
misgivings but that she thought, and flattered herself, that it was
caused, perhaps, by his having to go prematurely to Egypt, like
Malcolm Skene.

After Elliot had become convalescent, and Roland, with others, had
resumed their guns, and betaken them again to the slaughter of the
partridges, all went well apparently for a few weeks.  There were gay
riding parties in the afternoon to visit the ruined castles at Ceres
and the muir where Archbishop Sharpe was slain; to the caves of Dura
Den at Kemback; picnics to Creich and the hills of Logie; there were
dances in the evening, and music, when Hester's rich contralto,
Elliot's tenor, Maude's soft soprano, and Roland's bass, took
principal parts.

  'Young hearts, bright eyes, and rosy lips were there;
    And fairy steps, and light and laughing voices
  Ringing like welcome music through the air--
    A sound at which the untroubled heart rejoices.'


Life seemed a happy idyl, and that of Annot--we must suppose that she
had her special dreams of happiness too--was ever gay apparently; but
Roland's soul was secretly steeped in misery!

Circumstanced as he knew himself to be, Annot's frequent praises of
Earlshaugh and her delight with all therein galled and fretted him,
and made him so strange in manner at times that the girl, to do her
justice, was bewildered and grieved; and Hester, though she wished it
not nor thought of it, was in some degree avenged.

'What can be the meaning of it?' was often Annot's secret thought.

Like Elliot and Maude, to her it seemed that perhaps they were too
happy for commonplace speeches as they idled hand-in-hand about the
grounds, wandering through vistas of thick and venerable
hawthorn-hedges, away by the thatched hamlet, through the wooded
haugh, where the 'auld brig-stane' still spanned the wimpling burn,
while face turned to radiant face, and loving eye met eye.

In such moments what need had they, she thought, for words that might
seem dull or clumsy?  'But, after all, words, though coarse or
clumsy, are the coin in which human creatures must pay each other,
and failing in which they are often bankrupts for life.'

Had Roland spoken then and said much that he left unsaid, perhaps
much suffering might have been spared him at a future time--we says
'perhaps,' but not with certainty, as we have only our story to tell,
without indulging in casuistry as to what might have occurred in the
sequel.

The story of the will, Annot began to think, must have been a
fallacy--a cruel and unpalatable one.  By-and-by she refused to face
the probability at all; but she could not help remarking that when
their conversation insensibly turned upon the future, as that of
lovers must do, upon their probable trip to London, his certain tour
of service in Egypt, or on anything that lay beyond the sunny horizon
of the _present_, Roland became strange in manner, abrupt and cloudy,
and nervously sought to turn the subject into another channel.

Could he tell her yet, that he was a kind of outcast in the house of
his forefathers; that he was a mere visitor at Earlshaugh, and that
not a foot of the soil he trod was his own?

And so day by day and night after night went on.  The riding lessons
through which Annot hoped sometime to shine in 'The Lady's Mile,'
were still continued, on the beautiful and graceful pad which old
Johnnie Buckle had procured for her at Cupar fair--tasks requiring at
Roland's hand much adjustment of flowing skirts and loose reins; of a
dainty foot in a tiny stirrup of bright steel; the buttoning of
pretty gauntlets; much pressure of lingering fingers, and joyous
laughter in the sunny and grassy parks, where now the deers' antlers
were still lying, though one tradition avers that stags bury their
horns in the moss after casting them, and another that they chew and
eat them--a practice which Gavin Fowler and the forester asserted
they had often seen them attempt.

'And in all your stately old home there is not even one traditional
ghost?' said Annot, looking back from the spacious lawn to where the
lofty façade of the ancient fortalice towered up on its rock in the
red autumnal sunshine.

'A ghost there is, or used to be in my grandmother's time, at the
Weird Yett,' replied Roland; 'but in the house, thank Heaven,
no--though there are bits about it eerie enough to scare the
housemaids after dark without that dismal adjunct; yet blood enough
and to spare has been shed in and about Earlshaugh often in the olden
time; and more than one ancestor of mine has ridden forth to die on
the battlefield or at Edinburgh Cross, for the Stuart kings.  But let
us drop this subject, Annot; a fellow cuts a poor figure swaggering
about his ancestors and their belongings in these days, when even
every Cockney cad airs his imaginary bit of heraldry on his
notepaper.'

'But there were fairies surely in the Fairy Den?' persisted Annot.

'But never with golden hair like yours, Annot,' said Roland, laughing
now.  'Tradition has it that an ancestor of mine, who was Master of
the Horse to Anne of Denmark, made a friend of an old Elf who dwelt
in the glen--a droll little fellow with a huge head, a great ruff,
and a gray beard that reached to his knees--and when the then Laird
of Earlshaugh, after being caught in a flirtation with the Queen in
Falkland Wood, was about to be led to the scaffold for his pretended
share in the Gowrie Conspiracy, the Elf came on a white palfrey and
bore him away, through crowd and soldiers and all, from the Heading
Hill of Stirling to his own woods of Earlshaugh, a story which Sir
Walter Scott assigns to another family, I believe.'

So Annot strove with success in partially abandoning herself to the
joy of the present, and to the full budding hope of the future.

She could not bring herself, 'little woman of the world,' as Hester
knew her to be, to do or say anything that could have the aspect of a
wish on her part to hurry on a marriage before Roland departed to
Egypt; but, while trembling at all the contingencies thereby
involved, had to content herself by prettily and coquettishly
referring from time to time to the events of their future life
together and combined; consoling herself with the knowledge that so
far as Roland's honour went, and that of his family, 'an engagement
known to all the world is much more difficult to break than one to
which only three or four persons are privy;' whilst for herself, she
adopted the tone of being, in her correspondence with London friends,
vague and cloudy, as if the engagement might or might not be; or that
her visit to Earlshaugh meant nothing at all, more than one anywhere
else.

'Now that Jack is nearly quite well,' said Maude to her, 'we are to
have all manner of festivities before the pheasant shooting is over,
and we all bid adieu to dear old Earlshaugh, Roland says.  There will
be a ball, the Hunt Ball, a steeplechase is also talked of, and I
know not what more.'

But ere these things came to pass there occurred a catastrophe which
none at Earlshaugh could foresee, that of which, to his profound
concern and bewilderment, Malcolm Skene read in the papers at Pietro
Girolamo's roulette saloon, at Cairo.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE FIRST OF OCTOBER.

'As weel try to sup soor dook wi' an elshin as shoot in comfort wi'
that coofor waur--that gowk Hawkey Sharpe--so thank gudeness he's no
wi' us this day!' snorted old Gavin Fowler, the gamekeeper, when, on
the morning of the all-important 1st of October, he shouldered his
gun and whistled forth the dogs.

But Hawkey Sharpe was fated to be cognisant of one grim feature in
that day's sport in a way none knew save himself.

So October had come--'the time,' says Colonel Hawker, 'when the
farmer has leisure to enjoy a little sport after all his hard labour
without neglecting his business; and the gentleman, by a day's
shooting at that time, becomes refreshed and invigorated, instead of
wearing out himself and his dogs by slaving after partridges under
the broiling sun of the preceding month.  The evenings begin to
close, and he then enjoys his home and fireside, after a day's
shooting of sufficient duration to brace his nerves and make
everything agreeable.'

'We'll make good bags to-day,' was the opinion of all.

Despite Maude's entreaties, Jack Elliot was too keen a sportsman to
forego the first day of the pheasant shooting, though his scar was
scarcely healed, and thought, though he did not say so to her, that
next October might see him 'potting' a darker kind of game in the
Soudan.

'Get me a golden pheasant's wing for my hat, dear Roland,' said Annot
laughingly, as he came forth with his favourite breechloader from the
gun-room; and though such birds were scarce in the East Neuk, the
request proved somewhat of a fatal one, as we shall show; but Annot
had no foreboding of that when, with her usual childish effusiveness,
she bade Roland farewell, as he went to join the group of sportsmen
and dogs at the _porte-cochère_.

'You have no father, I believe, Miss Drummond?' said Mrs. Lindsay,
who had been observing her.

'No; poor papa died quite suddenly about two years ago,' was the
reply.

'Suddenly?' queried Mrs. Lindsay, becoming interested.

'Yes,' said Annot hesitatingly.

'In what way--by an accident?'

'Oh, dear--no.'

'How then?'

'Of disease of the heart; we never suspected it, but he dropped down
dead--quite dead--while poor mamma was speaking to him about a drive
in the park--but oh! what have I said to startle you so?' she added,
on perceiving that Mrs. Lindsay grew pale as ashes, and half closing
her eyes, pressed her hand upon her left breast, a custom she had
when excited.

'Nothing--nothing--only a faintness,' she said, with something of
irritation; 'it is the wind without.'

'But there is none,' urged Annot.

'I often feel this when stormy weather is at hand,' replied the other
with an attempt at a smile, but a ghastly one; and Annot said no
more, as she had already seen that the slightest reference to her
secret ailment irritated Mrs. Lindsay, who abruptly left her.

'There is not much liking lost between us,' thought the young lady,
as she adjusted in the breast of her morning dress a bunch of
stephanotis Roland had given her.  'It is evident, too, that Mrs.
Lindsay knows little of county society, and is one with whom county
society is shy of associating.  Well, well; when Roland and I are
married, this grim matron shall be relegated from Earlshaugh to the
Dower House at King's Wood.  It is a pity we shall not be able to
send her farther off.'

Meanwhile the sportsmen were getting to work, and the guns began to
bang in the coverts.

Autumn was rapidly advancing now; every portion of the beautiful
landscape told the eye so.  The summer look was gone, and the sound
of the leaves fluttering down was apt to make one thoughtful.  Then
even the sun seems older; he rises later, and goes to bed earlier.
The singing birds had gone from the King's Wood and the Earl's Haugh
to warmer climes.  The swallows were preparing to leave, assembling
at their own places on the banks of the burn, waiting till thousands
mustered for their mysterious southern flight.  Elsewhere, as Clare
has it, might be seen--

  'The hedger stopping gaps, amid the leaves,
  Which time o'erhead in every colour weaves;
  The milkmaid passing, with a timid look,
  From stone to stone across the brimming brook;
  The cottar journeying with his noisy swine
  Along the wood side, where the branches twine;
  Shaking from many oaks the acorns brown,
  Or from the hedges red haws dashing down.'


But the scenery was lost on the sportsmen, who had eyes and ears for
the pheasants alone!

The keepers and beaters were waiting at the corner of the King's Wood
when Roland and his friends made their appearance.

Though the copses had not lost all their autumnal glory, the season
was an advanced one; a cold breeze swept down the grassy glens, and
frost rime hung for a time on boughs and thick undergrowth, sparkling
like diamonds in the bright morning sunshine, till melted away; and
in the clear air was heard that which someone describes as the
indescribable and never-to-be-forgotten sound for the sportsman--that
of the pheasant as he rises before the advancing line of
beaters--when the cock bird, roused by the tapping of their sticks on
the tree trunks, whirrs high over the tops to some sanctuary in the
wood, which the gun beneath him fates him never to reach.

A spirt of smoke spouts upward, some brown feathers puff out in the
air, and with closed wings the beautiful bird falls within some
thirty yards of its killer.

Though the shooting was most successful, other coverts than the
King's Wood were tried, some of which gave pheasants, others rabbits
and hares, till fairly good bags were made; and so the sportsmen shot
down the side of a remote spur of the Ochil hills--save the banging
of the guns no other sounds being heard but the beating of sticks
against trees or whin bushes, and the voices of Gavin and the beaters
shouting, 'Mark cock,' ''Ware hen,' 'Hare forward,' and so on, till a
dark dell was reached--a regular zeriba (Roland called it) of
bracken, briars, and gorse--where luncheon was to meet the party--one
of the not least pleasant features of a day's shooting; but the
sportsmen had become so intent on their work that they now realized
fully for the first time that the day had become overcast; masses of
dark gathered cloud had enveloped the sun; that dense gray mist was
rolling along the upper slopes of the hills, and in the distant
direction of Earlshaugh, the dark and blurred horizon showed that
rain was pouring aslant, and so heavily that Maude and Hester, who
had promised to bring the viands in the pony phaeton, would not dream
of leaving the shelter of the house.

'Homeward' was now the word, but not before the last beat of the
day--reserved as a _bonne bouche_--was made, though noon was past and
gloom was gathering speedily.

At the upper end of a little glen a long belt of firs bounded a field
beyond which rose another belt, and in the field the guns were
posted, while the pheasants could be seen making for the head of the
wood.

Nearer and more near came the tapping of the beaters' rods, until one
gallant bird rose at the edge and was knocked over by Roland, who was
far away on the extreme right of the line.  The tapping went gently
on lest too many birds should be put up at once.  Some rapid firing
followed--all the more rapidly that the mist and rain were coming
down the hill-slopes together.

In quick succession the birds left the covert, some flying to one
flank, some to the other, while others rose high in the air, and some
remained grovelling amid the undergrowth, never to leave it alive.

It was no slaughter--no _battue_--however; about a dozen brace were
knocked over and picked up ere the mist descended over the field and
its boundary belts of fir trees, and drawing their cartridges, in
twos and threes, with their guns under their arms and their coat
collars up, for the rain was falling now, the sportsmen began to take
their way back towards the house, which was then some miles distant:
and all reached it, in the gathering gloom of a prematurely early
evening--weary, worn, yet in high spirits, and--save for the contents
of their flasks--unrefreshed, when they discovered that Roland
Lindsay was _not_ with them--that in some unaccountable way they had,
somehow, lost or missed him on the mountain side.




CHAPTER XXIX.

ALARM AND ANXIETY.

Time passed on--the mist and rain deepened around Earlshaugh, veiling
coppice, glen, and field, and Roland did not appear.

He must have lost his way; but then every foot of the ground was so
familiar to him that such seemed impossible; and the idea of an
accident did not as yet occur to any one.

Thus none waited for him at the late luncheon table, and then, as in
the smoke-room and over the billiard balls, Jack Elliot and others
talked only of the events of the day--how the birds were flushed and
knocked over--of hits and misses, of game clean-killed, and so forth;
how one gorgeous old pheasant in particular came crashing down
through the wiry branches of the dark firs in the agonies of death;
and how deftly Roland killed his game, without requiring a keeper to
give the _coup de grâce_--there were never many runners before him,
and how 'he looked as fresh as a daisy after doing the ninety acre
copse,' and so forth, till his protracted absence and the closing in
of the darkness, with the ringing of the dressing-bell for dinner,
made all conscious of the time, and led them to wonder "what on
earth" had become of him--what had happened, and whither had he, or
could he have gone!

Speculations were many and endless,

'Some fatality seems surely to attend the shooting here now!' said
Mrs. Lindsay anxiously, as she nervously pressed her large white,
ringed hands together.

To some of those present the stately dinner, served up in the lofty
old dining-room, was a kind of mockery; and Maude and Hester, who
dreaded they knew not what, made but a pretence of eating, while the
presence of the servants proved a wholesome, if galling, restraint to
them; but not so to the irrepressible Annot, who talked away as usual
to the gentlemen present, and displayed all her pretty little tricks
of manner as if no cause for surmise or anxiety was on the tapis.

The unusual pallor, silence, and abstraction of Mrs. Lindsay, as she
sat at the head of the table, while Jack Elliot officiated as host,
were painfully apparent to those who, like Hester, watched her.

But she had her own secret thoughts, in which none, as yet, shared!

An attempt had been made to injure Elliot, perhaps mortally, under
cover of a blunder--a mishap.  Had the same evil hand been at work
again?

A cloud there was no dispelling began to settle over all;
conversation became broken, disjointed, overstrained, and the cloud
seemed deeper as a rising storm howled round the lofty old house,
shook the wet ivy against the windows, and grew in force with the
gathering gloom of night.

Annot's equanimity amid these influences grieved Maude and annoyed
Hester, who recalled her twaddling grief when Roland had been but a
few hours absent from her in Edinburgh.

'How can she bear herself so?' said Maude.

'Because she is heartless,' replied Hester; 'and to say the least of
her, I never could imagine Annot, with all her prettiness and
_espièglerie_, at the head of a household, or taking her place in
society like a woman of sense.'

Hour succeeded hour, and still there was no appearance of Roland, and
the clang of the great iron bell in the _porte-cochère_ was listened
for in vain.

So the night came undoubtedly on, but what a night it proved to be of
storm and darkness!

The rain hissed on the swaying branches of the great trees now almost
stripped and bare; it tore down the flowers from the rocks on which
the house stood, and wrenched away the matted ivy from turret and
chimney; the green turf of the lawn and meadows was soaked till it
became a kind of bog; the winding walks that descended to the old
fortalice became miniature cascades that shone through the gloom,
while the wind wailed in the machicolations of the upper walls in
weird and solemn gusts, to die away down the haugh below.

That a tempest had been coming some of the older people about the
place, like Gavin Fowler, had foretold, as that loud and hollow noise
like distant thunder that often precedes a storm among the Scottish
mountains had been heard among the spurs of the Ochils, and from
which in the regions farther North, the superstitious Highlanders, as
General Stewart tells, presage many omens, when 'the Spirit of the
Mountain shrieks.'

All night long the house-bell was clanged at intervals from the
bartizan, to the alarm of the neighbourhood.

London-bred Annot was scared at last by the elemental war, by these
strange sounds, and the pale faces of those about her, and with
blanched visage she peered from the deeply embayed windows into the
darkness without, with genuine alarm, now.

How often had she and Roland rambled in yonder green park, not a
vestige of which could now be seen even between the flying glimpses
of the moon, or crossed it together, talking of and planning out that
future which he seemed to approach with such doubt and diffidence
latterly; or as he went forth with his breechloader on his shoulder
and she clinging with interlaced hands on his right arm--he tall,
strong, and stalwart, with his dogs at his heels, and looking down
lovingly and trustfully into her fair, smiling face.

Now they might never there and thus walk again, yet her tears seemed
to be lodged very deep just then.

But softer Hester's thoughts were more acute.  Had Roland perished in
some unforeseen, mysterious, and terrible manner?  Was this the last
of _her_ secret love-dream, and had all hope, sweetness, glamour and
beauty gone out of her heart--out of her life altogether?

Oh, what had happened?

Could Hawkey Sharpe--no, she thrust even fear of him on one side;
but, as the time stole on and the midnight hour passed without
tidings, she tortured herself with questions, lay down without
undressing, and wetted her pillow with tears for the doubly lost
companion of her infancy, of her girlhood, and its riper
years--thinking all the while that her sorrow, her longing, and
passionate terrors were for the affianced of another--of the artful
Annot Drummond.

Clinging to the supposition that he must have mistaken his way in the
swiftly descending mist, Jack Elliot and other guests, with
serving-men, keepers, and hunters, carrying lanterns and poles, set
out more than once into the darkness, rack, and storm to search
without avail, and to return wet and weary.

Hour after hour the circle at Earlshaugh watched and waited,
trembling at every gust and listening to every sound--shaken and
weakened by a suspense that grew intolerable.

From the windows nothing could be seen--not even the tossing trees
close by, or the dark outline of the distant mountains.  The
listeners' hearts beat quick--gust after gust swept past, but brought
no welcome sound with it, and they became familiarized with the idea
that some catastrophe must have happened or tidings of the absent
must have come by that time; and with each returning party of
searchers, hope grew less and less, while those most vitally
concerned in the absence of Roland began to shrink from questioning
or consulting them, as they were already too much disposed by their
nature to adopt the gloomiest and most morbid views; and still the
storm gusts continued to shake the windows, and dash against them
showers of leaves and the wet masses of overhanging foliage.

Without his cheerful presence and general _bonhomie_ of manner, how
empty and void the great old drawing-room--yea, the house
itself--seemed now!  All his occasional strange, abstracted, and
thoughtful moods were forgotten, and now the hours of the dark
autumnal morning wore inexorably on.

A few of the guests had retired to their rooms, but the majority
passed the time on easy-chairs, watching and waiting for what might
transpire.  Now and then a dog whined mournfully, and cocked its ears
as if to listen, adding to the eerie nature of the vigil.

'Three,' said Hester to Maude when the clocks were heard striking.
Then followed 'four' and 'five.'  The fires were made up anew.

'Oh, my God, what _can_ have happened!' thought the two girls in
their hearts, glancing at Annot, who, overcome by weariness, had
dropped into a profound sleep; and ere long the red rays of the sun,
as he rose from his bed in the German Sea, began to tinge the summits
of the distant Ochils and the nearer Lomonds, and the storm was dying
fast away.

It was impossible now to suppose that he could in any manner have
lost himself, or taken shelter in the house of any friend or tenant,
as no message came from him, and the last idea was completely
dissipated by the final return of Gavin Fowler, who, with his staff
of keepers and beaters, had been at every farm and house within miles
making inquiries, but in vain.

Nothing had been seen or heard of the lost one.

Gavin, however, had seen something which, though he spoke not of it
then, had given him cause for anxious thought and much speculation.
This was Mr. Hawkey Sharpe (who for some time past had betaken him
elsewhere) rapidly and furtively passing out by the Weird Yett, well
muffled up, either to conceal his face or for warmth against the cold
morning air; and by the path he had taken, he had evidently come by
the back private door from the house of Earlshaugh!

'What's i' the wind noo?' muttered the old gamekeeper, with a glare
in his dark gray eye, and with knitted brows, 'But there's nae hawk,
Maister Hawkey Sharpe, flees sae high but he will fa' to some lure.
They were gey scant o' bairns that brocht you up.'




CHAPTER XXX.

THE KELPIE'S CLEUGH.

On the extreme flank of his party, and rather farther out or off than
usual, Roland, intent on following his game, took no heed at first of
the swiftly down-coming mist, till it fell like a curtain between him
and his companions, who had drawn their cartridges and ceased firing.
Even the sound of their voices was muffled by the density of the
atmosphere and he knew not where they were; but, thinking the cloud
would lift, he felt not the least concern, but went forward, as he
conceived, in the direction of home, and that which led towards the
field where the last beat of the day had been made; but as he
proceeded the ground seemed less and less familiar to him.

Over a high bank, slippery with dead leaves and the thawed rime of
the past morning, he went, a nasty place to get across, and in doing
so he prudently removed the cartridges from his gun, lest he might
slip, trip, or stumble to the detriment of himself or some adjacent
companion.

Pausing at times, he uttered a hallo, but got no response.  He could
see nothing of the belts of firs before referred to; but he came upon
clumps of hazel, nearly destitute of leaves, growing thickly about
the roots, and expanding as they rose some nine feet or so above the
ground.

There was a dense undergrowth of bracken and intertwisted brambles
here, a tangle of dead leaves, stems, and thorns, most perplexing to
find one's self among in a dense mist.  From amid these a rabbit or
hare scudded forth; but he took no heed of it.

Suddenly a bird--a fine golden pheasant--whirred up, and settled down
again in the covert very near him.  He remembered the request of
Annot.  Never had the latter seemed brighter, dearer, or sweeter too,
than that morning when she playfully asked him to bring a golden
pheasant's wing, and secretly returned his farewell caress with such
joy and warmth.

Dropping a charge into one of his barrels, he fired, but failed to
kill the bird, which, hit somewhere, beat the earth with its wings
and rolled or ran forward into the mist.  Dropping his gun, Roland
darted forward after it--the tendril of a bramble caught his feet,
and a gasping cry escaped him as he fell heavily on his face and then
downward--he knew not where!

Instinctively and desperately he clutched something; it was turf on a
rocky edge.  He felt it yielding; a small tree, a silver birch, grew
near, and wildly he caught a branch thereof; and swung out over some
profundity, he knew not what or where, till like a flash of lightning
there came upon his memory the Burn Cleugh, a deep, rocky chasm,
which had been the mysterious terror of his boyhood--as the fabled
shade of a treacherous kelpie, a hairy fiend with red eyes and red
claws--a rent or rift in the low hills some miles from his home, and
at the bottom of which, about sixty feet and more below, the burn
referred to as passing through the Earl's Haugh, and near the hamlet
of the same name, flowed towards Eden.

'Save me--God save me!' rose to his lips, and with each respiration
as he clung to the branch and the bead-drops started to his forehead,
he lived a lifetime--a lifetime as it were of keenest agony.

He knew well the profoundity of the rocky abyss that yawned in
obscurity below him, and he heard the slow gurgle of the burn as it
chafed against the stones that barred its downward passage, and,
mechanically, as one in a dream who fears to fall, he strove to sway
his body upward, but could find no rest for his footsteps, and felt
that the birch branch to which he clung was gradually but
surely--rending!  He had no terror of death in itself--none of death
in the battlefield, as we have shown; but from such a fate as this he
shrank; his soul seemed to die within him, and with every respiration
there seemed to come the agony of a whole lifetime.

His nerve was gone, and no marvel that it was so.  He might escape
instant death; but not the most dreadful mutilation; and, sooth to
say, he dreaded that a thousand times more than death.

One glance downward into that dark and misty chasm was in itself a
summons to death, and he knew well the terrible bed of stones and
boulders that lay below.

He became paralyzed--paralyzed with a great and stunning fear.  The
rending of the branch continued; his arms were waxing faint and
strained; his fingers feeble; and it was only a question of moments
between time and eternity--fall--fall he must--how far--how deep
down--the depth he had forgotten.

The suspense was horrible; yet it was full of the dire certainty of a
dreadful end.

Every act and scene of his past life came surging up to memory--the
memory of less than a minute, now.

The branch parted; but, still grasping it, down he went whizzing
through the mist--there was a stunning crash as he fell first on a
ledge of rock and then into the stream's stony bed below, and then
sight and sense and sound passed away from him!


How long he lay there he knew not.  After a time consciousness
returned, but he felt himself incapable of action--of motion--almost
of thinking.

The ledge or shelf of rock, which was covered by soft turf, had first
received him, and thus broken the fall, which ended, we have said, in
the bed of the stream, in which he was partially immersed from the
waist downwards; but whether his limbs were broken or dislocated he
knew not then, and there he lay helpless, with the cold current
trickling past and partly over him, the rocks towering sharply and
steeply up on either side of him to where their summits were hidden
in the masses of eddying mist, that now began to rise and sink as the
wind increased and the afternoon began to close.

How long might he lie there undiscovered in that desolate spot, which
he knew so few approached?  How long would he last, suffering as he
did then?  And was a miserable death, such as this--there and amid
such surroundings--to be the end of his young life, with all its
bright hopes and loving aspirations for the future?

Cold though he began to feel--icy cold--hot bead drops suffused his
temples at the idea, and at all his fancy began to picture, and more
than once a weak cry for aid escaped him.

The Cleugh became more gloomy; he heard the bellowing of the wind,
and felt the falling rain, the torrents of which were certain to
swell and flood this tributary of the Eden, and the terror of being
drowned helplessly, as the darkness fell and the water rose, impelled
him to exertion, and by efforts that seemed almost superhuman he
contrived to drag his bruised body and--as he felt assured--broken
limbs somewhat more out of the bed of the stream; but the agony of
this was so great that he nearly fainted.

With all his constitutional strength and hardihood, he was certain
that he could never survive the night; and even if he did, the coming
morning and day might bring him no succour, for save when in search
of a lost sheep or lamb in winter, what shepherd ever sought the
recesses of the Kelpie's Cleugh?

As he lay there, with prayer in his heart and on his lips, his whole
past life--and then indeed did he thank God that it had been
well-nigh a blameless one--seemed to revolve again and again as in a
panorama before him; while a thousand forgotten and minute details
came floating back rapidly and vividly to memory.

His boyhood, his dead brother, his mother's face, as he had seen it
bending over him tenderly in his little cot, while she whispered the
prayer she was wont to give over him every night, till it became
woven up with the life of his infancy and riper years; his
roystering, fox-hunting father; his regiment--the jovial mess--the
gallant parade, with familiar faces seen amid the gleam of arms; his
service in Egypt--Tel-el-Kebir, with its frowning earthworks towering
through the star-lit gloom and dust of the night-march, till the red
artillery and musketry flashed over them in garlands of fire, as the
columns swept on and the Highland pipes sent up their pæan of victory!

Then came memories of Kashgate--its bloody and ghastly massacre--the
flight therefrom into the desert; and then sweet Merlwood and Hester
Maule, and Annot with her fair and goddess-like loveliness.

Then came the realities of the present again in all their misery,
power, and sway--the ceaseless rush of the cold stream, the pouring
rain upon his upturned face, the drifting clouds, the occasional
glinting of the stars, the rustle of the wet leaves torn from the
trees by the gusty wind, and the too probable chances of the coming
death through pain, chill, exposure, and utter exhaustion.

Again, exerting all his powers, a despairing cry escaped him, and
this time a sound responded.  It was only a heron, however, that,
full of terror, seemed to flash out from its nest in the rocks, and
winged its way out of sight in a moment.

As he lay there it seemed to him as if time had a torturing power of
spinning out its seconds, minutes, and hours that he had never known
it to have before.

But to lie there perishing within almost rifle-shot of the roof under
which he was born--so near his friends and so many who loved
him--Annot more than all--was a terrible conviction--one apparently
unnatural, unrealizable!

The mist had gone now, and the dark rocks between which he lay began
to assume strange and gruesome forms in the weird light of the
occasional stars, still more so when once or twice a weird glimpse of
the stormy moon penetrated into the Cleugh.

'Oh, God!' cried he imploringly, 'to perish--to perish thus!'

At that moment, in a swiftly passing gleam of moonshine, he saw a
face--a human face--peering over the rocks above as if seeking to
penetrate the watery gloom below, and again a cry for help--help for
the sake of mercy, for the sake of Heaven, escaped him.

For a moment, we say, the face was there; the next it vanished, as a
dark mass of cloud swept over the silver disc of the moon, and a
sound, painfully and unmistakably like a mocking laugh, reached the
ears of the sufferer.

The face--if face it actually was--and not that of the fabled fiend,
the Kelpie of the Cleugh, appeared no more; the hours went by; no
succour came, and Roland, as he now resigned himself to the worst,
believed that what he had seen, or thought he had seen, was but the
creation of his own fevered and over-excited fancy.




CHAPTER XXXI.

'ALL OVER NOW!'

But it was no delirious delusion of Roland's that he had seen a human
face, or heard a human voice respond mockingly to his despairing cry
for aid.

It singularly chanced that about an hour before midnight, and during
a lull in the storm, Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, who--as we have said--had
been seen hovering about the vicinity of Earlshaugh, was betaking
himself thither, intent on seeing his sister, the mistress thereof
(whom he also deemed his banker) concerning some of his monetary
affairs, and had been passing on foot by the narrow sheep-path that
skirted the verge of the dangerous Cleugh, when the occasional cries
of the sufferer reached his ear, and on peering down he had speedily
discovered by his voice _who_ that sufferer was.

He paused for a minute till quite assured of the fact, and though at
a loss to conceive how the event had come to pass, he proceeded with
quickened steps for some miles, till he reached the private
entrance--for which he had a key--but not for the purpose of raising
an alarm, or procuring or sending forth succour.  Of that he had not
the least intention, as we shall show.  'In the place where the tree
falleth, there let it lie,' was the text of Mr. Hawkey Sharpe just
then.

He found the entire household on the _qui vive_, and heard that
Roland Lindsay was missing, thus corroborating to the fullest extent
any detail that might be wanting, and obviating all doubt as to the
episode at the Cleugh.

'What a fuss,' said he mockingly, 'about a storm of rain!'

It now rested with him, by the utterance of a single word, or little
more, to save the missing one from a miserable and lingering death;
but that word remained unuttered, and with a grim and mocking smile
upon his coarse lips, and a gleam of fiendish joy in his watery gray
eyes, he proceeded to his sanctum, up the old turret stair, without
the sensation of his steps going downward according to the household
tradition.

'Lindsay lost in this storm!' he thought.  'How came he to tumble or
to be thrown down there--thrown, by whom?' he added mentally, for his
mind was ever prone to evil.  'Then I am not wrong--it _was_ his
voice I heard at the bottom of the Kelpie's Cleugh!  Ha! ha! let him
lie there till the greedy gleds pick his bones to pieces!  Well--come
what may, I have had no hand in _this_!' he continued, thinking
doubtless of the charge of No. 5 aimed at Captain Elliot.

Roland had often goaded Hawkey to the verge of madness by his cool,
haughty bearing and unassailable scorn, even at times when the latter
secretly amused him by the 'society' airs he strove to assume; but
Hawkey's time for vengeance seemed to have come unexpectedly and all
unsought for; and in fancy still he seemed to glare gloatingly down
into the dark chasm where the pale sufferer lay in his peril,
doubtless with many a bone broken, and the waters of the burn rising
fast, for the rain was falling in torrents, and there was a _spate_
in all the mountain streams.

Hawkey threw off his soaked coat, invested his figure in a loose,
warm _robe de chambre_, and took a bottle of his favourite 'blend'
from his private cellarette, after which he threw himself into an
easy-chair, with his feet upon another, and strove to reflect.

'I always thought, if I could get rid of that fellow Lindsay by fair
means or foul, this place would certainly be mine, unless Deb plays
the fool--mine!  The girl in my way is nothing, yet I may have her
too, and if not, the _other_ one with the yellow hair.  After what I
saw by a gleam of the Macfarlanes' lantern to-night, the way seems
pretty clear now!'

He tugged his straw-coloured moustache, and after fixing his eyes
with a self-satisfied glare on vacancy for a full minute, rang the
bell for supper imperiously.

Mr. Hawkey Sharpe was one who never troubled himself about the past,
and seldom about the future; his enjoyment was in the present, and
the mere fact of living well and jollily without having work to do.

Just then he was pretty full of alcohol and exultant hope--two very
good things in their way to lay in a stock of.  He cared little what
he did, but he dreaded greatly discovery in any of his little
trickeries.

To him the world was divided into two portions, those who cheat and
those who are cheated.

'Rid of Lindsay,' was the ever-recurring thought; 'rid of his
presence, local influence, and d----d impudence, I shall have this
place again more than ever to myself, if I can only throw a little
dust in Deb's eyes, and have, perhaps, my choice of these two
stunning girls when I choke off that other snob, Elliot.'

Excitement consequent on this most unlooked-for episode at the Cleugh
had nearly driven out of his mind the object which had brought him
that night to Earlshaugh, and his last potations of hot whisky toddy
at The Thane of Fife, a tavern or roadside inn on the skirts of the
park, had for a time rather clouded his intellect, without, however,
spoiling his usually excellent appetite.

Thus when Tom Trotter arrived with a large silver tray--a racing
trophy of the late laird's career--covered with a spotless white
napkin, and having thereon curried lobster, mutton cutlets, devilled
kidneys, and beef kabobs on silver skewers, with a bottle of Mumm, he
drew in his chair and made a repast, all the more pleasantly perhaps
that he heard at intervals the clang of the great house bell
overhead, and saw the lanterns of the searchers like glow-worms amid
the storm of rain and wind, as they set forth again on their bootless
errand, and then a smile that Mephistopheles might have envied spread
over his face.

'Lindsay lost!' he muttered jocularly.  'Well, there was mair lost at
Shirramuir when the Hielandman lost his faither and mither, and a
gude buff belt that was worth them baith.'

He had a habit, when liquor loosened his tongue, of soliloquizing,
and he was in this mood to-night.

'Now, how to raise the ready!' he muttered, as he thrust the silver
salver aside, and drew the decanter once more towards him, together
with his briar-root and tobacco-pouch.  'The money I have lost must
go to a fellow who is said to possess the power of turning everything
he touches to gold--to gold!  Gad, could I only do that, I wouldn't
even sponge on old Deb in Earlshaugh, or wait for a dead woman's
shoes.  Besides, if I don't please her, she may hand over the whole
place to the Free Kirk; and, d--n it, that's not to be thought
of!--that body which, as she always says, seceded so nobly, and
scorned the loaves and fishes.  If I could only get hold of Deb's
cheque-book; but she keeps everything so devilish close and secure!
When a fellow comes to be as I am,' he continued, rolling his eyes
about and lighting his pipe with infinite
difficulty--'bravo!--there's a devil of a gust of wind--hope you like
it, Lindsay--when a fellow, I say, comes to be as I am, with an
infinitesimal balance at the banker's and not much credit with his
tailor, he can't be particular to a shade what he does--and so about
the cheque-book----'

'What have you been doing _now_?' asked a voice behind him.

His sister Deborah again!  He grew very pale and nearly dropped his
pipe.  'How much had she overhead?' was his first thought; 'curse
this habit of thinking aloud!' was his second.

'You are always stealing on a fellow unawares, Deb,' said he, in a
thick and uncertain voice; 'it is deuced unpleasant--startles one so.'

Her face was pale as usual; but her eyes and mouth expressed anger,
pain, and a good deal of indignation and contempt too.

'What have you done?' she demanded categorically.

'Nothing,' said he, striving to collect his thoughts; 'but made my
way here in a devil of a shower, for want of other shelter.'

'You know what has happened?'

'To Lindsay--yes.'

'You do?' she exclaimed, making a step forward, with a hand on her
side, as if her usual pain was there.

'I know that he is absent--missing--that is all,' he replied doggedly.

'Nothing more?'

'Nothing more--and care little, as you may suppose,' he replied,
avoiding her keen searching eye by carefully filling his pipe.
'There is always some row on,' he grumbled; 'what a petty world this
is after all--I wonder if the fixed stars are inhabited.'

'That will not matter to you, I should think.'

'Why?'

'You will go some other way, I fear.'

'Deb, your surmise is unpleasant.'

The manner of Hawkey Sharpe to his sister had lost, just then, much
of its general self-contained assurance.  She detected the change,
and it rendered her suspicious.

'Save this poor little dog Fifine,' said she, caressing the cur she
carried under an arm, and which was greedily sniffing the _débris_ of
Mr. Hawkey's supper, 'I do not know a living creature who really
cares for me!'

'Oh--come now, Deb--hang it!' said her brother in an expostulatory
manner.

'You have some object in coming here to-night,' said she sternly; 'to
the point at once, Hawkey?'

'Well, since you force me, Deb--I have been unfortunate in some
speculations.'

'Is it thus you describe your losses on the race-course?'

'At the western meeting--yes--backed the wrong or losing
horse--_Scottish Patriot_--devil of a mess, Deb!'

'And lost--how much?  An unlucky name.'

'Two thousand pounds--must have the money somehow--I'm booked for it,
and you know the adage--

  "A horse kicking, a dog biting,
  A gentleman's word without his writing,"

are none of them in my way.'

'I know nothing of the adage, but this I know--there are bounds to
patience.'

'My dear Deb!' said he coaxingly.

'I have lost much--too much, indeed, through you--money that might be
put to good and holy uses--and now shall lose no more!'

Turning abruptly, she swept away and left him.

He looked after her with absolutely a red glare of rage in his pale
gray eyes.

'Good and holy uses--meaning the kirk of course!' he muttered with a
savage malediction.  'We shall see--we shall see.  She must have
heard me muttering about her cheque-book--ass that I am; but that
money I must have before three months are past if I rake Pandemonium
for it!'

Again the clanging of the house bell fell upon his ear, and he heard
the storm as it rose and died away to rise again.  He took another
glass of stiff grog and glared at the great antique clock on the
mantel-shelf.

'Three in the morning,' he muttered.  'It must be all over with _him_
by this time--all over now!'




CHAPTER XXII.

PELION ON OSSA.

The rain and the wind were over; the storm had passed away into the
German Sea, as perhaps more than one luckless craft found to its cost
between Fife Ness and the shores of Jutland.

It was over in the vicinity of Earlshaugh; the sluices of heaven
seemed to have emptied themselves at last; but the atmosphere, if
clear, was damp and laden with rain, and the masses of ivy, rent and
torn by the wind, flapped against the walls of the old manor-house.

The hour was early; bright and clear the morning had come from the
German Sea, and a freshness lay over all the fields and groves of the
East Neuk.  After such a terrible night there seemed something
fairy-like in such a morning with all its details, but the excitement
was yet keen in Earlshaugh.

The horse-chestnuts still wore their changing livery of shining gold,
and the mountain ash looked gray, but lime and linden were alike
nearly stripped of their leaves; and when the breeze blew through the
old oaks of the King's Wood the pale acorns came tumbling out of
their cups--the tiny drinking-cups of the freakish elves that once
abode in the Fairy Den.

Old Jamie Spens, the ex-poacher, now came with startling tidings to
Earlshaugh.  A shepherd's dog--one of those Scottish collies, of all
dogs the most faithful, intelligent, and useful, as they can discover
by the scent any sheep that may have the misfortune to be overblown
by the snow, had been seen careering wildly in the vicinity of the
rocky Cleugh, disappearing down it, to return to the verge barking
and yelping loudly, as if he had evidently discovered someone or
something there.

Old Spens had looked down, and too surely saw the young laird lying
pale, still, and motionless.

'Dead?' asked a score of voices.

'After sic a nicht and sic a fa' what could ye expect?' said the old
man with tears in his eyes as he remembered Roland's kindness to
himself, adding, as he shook his grizzled head, 'but I hope no--I
hope no.'

Spens had found Roland's gun, and a golden pheasant, dead, near the
edge of the Cleugh, for which a party at once set out in all haste,
Hester and Maude, pale and colourless after such a sleepless night,
too impatient to wait for the pony phaeton which Jack Elliot offered
to drive, preceding them all, for the scene of the catastrophe was at
some distance from the house.

'They laugh longest who laugh last,' muttered Hawkey Sharpe to
himself, as--while pausing on the brow of an eminence beyond the
Weird Yett--he saw this party setting forth, a large group of
servants and keepers with poles and ropes--and he shook his clenched
hand mockingly and threateningly as he added, 'do your best, but

          '"In the midst of your glee,
  You've no seen the last o' my bonnet and me!"'


Annot did not accompany this excited party; it might be that her
strength was unequal to it at such an hour and over such ground, or
it might be that she had not heart enough for it.  There is no secret
of the latter, says a French writer, that our actions do not
disclose; and as Annot's heart seemed--well, Hester Maule cared not
then to analyze it; she was too disgusted to be angry.

But Annot, in all her selfish existence, had never before been, as
she thought, face to face with the most awful tragedy of
life--Death--and she shrank from the too probable necessity now.

So she remained behind with Mrs. Lindsay.  She was not accustomed to
such rough weather and such exhibitions; she would get her poor
little feet wet; she was subject to catching cold; the morning was
full of rain and wind--it was still quite tempestuous--such was never
seen in London; so Maude and Hester swept away in contemptuous
silence, leaving her, well shawled and cowering close to the fire in
Mrs. Lindsay's luxurious boudoir, and thought no more about her, as
she remained motionless, silent, and with her eyes certainly full of
tears, fixed on the changing features of the glowing coals, and
seeing her hopes of Earlshaugh too probably drifting far away in
distance, now!

Could this calamity be real? was the ever-recurrent thought in the
mind of Hester.  It seemed too fearful--too horrible to be true!  Was
she dreaming, and the victim of a hideous nightmare, from which she
would awake?

With all their impatience and anxiety to get on, the keepers,
servants, and others stepped short in mistaken kindness or courtesy
to the two young ladies who accompanied them; but in an incredibly
short space of time the yawning Cleugh was reached, where the
shepherd's faithful dog was still on guard, bounding to and fro as
they approached, barking and yelping wildly; and with hearts that
beat high and painfully--every respiration seeming an absolute
spasm--Hester and Maude, who clung to Elliot's arm, reached the verge
of the chasm, and on looking down saw too surely--as something like a
wail escaped the lips of each--Roland lying at the bottom, still and
motionless, half in and half out of the burn's rocky bed, as he, by
the last efforts of his strength, had painfully dragged or wrenched
himself.

Exclamations of commiseration and pity were now heard on every hand.

'This way, lads--round by the knowe foot,' cried old Gavin Fowler.

'No--by the other way--the descent is easier!' said Elliot
authoritatively; but heedless of both suggestions, Hester Maule, like
the gallant girl as she was, took a path of her own, and went
plunging down the very face of the rocks, apparently!

A cry of terror escaped the more timid Maude, as Hester seemed to
stumble and fall, or sway aside, but rose again and, trembling,
sobbing violently, in breathless and mental agony, her delicate
hands, which were gloveless, now torn and bleeding by brambles and
thorns, her beautiful brown hair all unbound and rolling in a cascade
down her back, finding footing where others would have found none,
grasping grass and heather tufts; while the more wary were making a
circuit, she was the first to reach him, and kneel by his side!

Raising his head, she laid her cheek upon his cold brow, while her
tears fell hot and fast, and for a moment she felt that this helpless
creature was indeed her own, whom even Annot Drummond could not take
from her then.

How pale, cold, sodden, and senseless he seemed!  With a moan of
horror that felt as if it came from her wildly beating heart, Hester
applied to his lips a tiny hunting flask of brandy with which she
had, with admirable foresight, supplied herself, and almost
unconsciously he imbibed a few drops.

'Roland!' said Hester, in an agonized voice.

A litter flicker of the eyelashes was the only response.

'Thank God, he lives!' exclaimed the girl.

'Annot, Annot!' he murmured.

'Always--always the idea of chat girl!' sighed Hester bitterly, and
she withdrew her face from its vicinity to his as Elliot, Gavin
Fowler, Spens, and others came splashing along the bed of the stream
from two directions, above and below the Cleugh, and ample succour
had come now.

What his injuries were, whether internal or external, or both, none
could know then.  He seemed passive as a child, weak and utterly
exhausted.  To all it was but too apparent that had succour been
longer of coming it had come too late; but now there was no lack of
loving and tender hands to bear him homeward, and into his father's
house.

'Annot's name was the first word that escaped his lips,' said Hester,
as with torn and tremulous fingers she knotted up her back hair into
a coil, and seemed on the verge of sinking, after her recent toil,
and under her present excitement and anxiety.

'That girl has been his evil genius--his weird--I think,' said Maude,
who never liked Annot, and mistrusted her; 'and he will never be free
so long as this weird hangs on him.'

'She, a Drummond!  The town-bred coward!' exclaimed Hester, her dark
violet eyes flashing fire, while she coloured at her own girlish
energy.

'The sooner she changes it to some characteristic one like Popkins or
Slopkins the better,' said Maude; 'but I think she would prefer
Lindsay.'

'Telegraph to Edinburgh at once for Professor ---- and Dr. ----,'
said Mrs. Lindsay, naming two of the chief medical men (as Roland was
carried up to his room), and evincing an interest that surprised
Maude, and for which her brother, Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, would not have
thanked her.

'I'll see to that myself,' said Jack Elliot, betaking himself at once
to the stable-yard that he might ride to the nearest railway-station,
and meantime send on to Earlshaugh the best local aid that could be
obtained in hot haste.

Roland's injuries were serious undoubtedly, but not so much so as had
been feared at first.

These were a partial dislocation of the left thigh bone and a strain
of the right ankle, both of which bade fair to mar his marching for
many a day; with a general shock to the whole system consequent on
the fall (which, but for the turfy ledge of rock that broke it, would
have proved fatal) and the exposure to the elements for a whole
autumnal night of storm and rain.  But with care and nursing, the
faculty--after pulling him about again and again till he was
well-nigh mad, after much tugging of their nether lips, as if in deep
thought, consultations over dry sherry and biscuit, and pocketing big
fees in an abstracted kind of manner--had no doubt, not the slightest
doubt, in fact, that with his naturally fine constitution he would
soon 'pull through.'

A crowd of people always hovered about the gate-lodges; women came
from their cottages, weavers, perhaps the last of their trade, from
their looms, and the ploughmen from their furrows to inquire after
the health of the young laird, for such these kindly folks of the
East Neuk deemed Roland still, for of the mysterious will they knew
little and cared less; horsemen came and went, and carriages, too,
the owners with their faces full of genuine anxiety, for the Lindsays
of Earlshaugh were much respected and well regarded as being among
the oldest proprietors in a county that has ever been rich in good
old historical families; and the veteran fox-hunting laird had been a
prime favourite in the field with all his compatriots.  So again, as
before, during Jack Elliot's mishap, the bell of the _porte-cochère_
sent forth its clang in reply to many a kind inquiry.

And many agreed with Maude that none in Earlshaugh were likely to
forget the unfortunate shooting season of that particular year, as
this calamity seemed to surpass the last.  It was grief upon grief,
like the classic piling of Pelion on Ossa.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

A TANGLED SKEIN.

Natheless the fair promises of the faculty, Roland Lindsay seemed to
hover between life and death for days.  They were a time of watching,
hoping, and fearing, and hoping again, till every heart that loved
him grew sick with apprehension and anxiety.

At first he looked like one all but dead; the great charm of his face
lay in the earnest and thoughtful expression of his eyes, and in
their rich brown colour; both were gone now, and the clearly cut and
refined lips, that denoted a brave, gentle, and kindly nature, were
blue and drawn; and a slight sword cut upon the cheek, won at
Kashgate, looked rather livid just then.

He was exhausted, languid, and passive, but, at times, seemed to
awaken into quickened intelligence; then anon his mind would wander a
little, and the names of Hester and Annot were oddly mingled on his
feverish tongue.

But there was great joy when he became sensible of the perfume of
flowers--the sweetest from the conservatory--culled and arranged by
the loving hands of the former, in the vases that ornamented his
room, and when he fully recognised the latter in attendance upon him.

'My little wife--my child-wife that is to be,' he whispered, 'you
love me still, though I am all shattered in this fashion?'

Then Annot caressed his hand, and placed her cheek upon it.

Guests had all departed, the key was turned in the gun-room door; the
dogs were idle in their kennels, and only Elliot, Hester, and Annot
remained as visitors at Earlshaugh.  The great house seemed very
silent now; but Roland, as strength and thought returned, was
thankful that the guests he had invited were gone.  The difficulty of
their presence had been tided over without any unpleasantness (save
the affair of Elliot and Sharpe), and now he felt only a loathing of
his paternal home, with an intense longing to be gone--to get well
and strong--to keep well, and then go, he cared not where at first,
so that Annot was with him, and then back to the regiment as soon as
possible, even before his leave was ended.

Annot was now--unlike the Annot who cowered over the boudoir fire on
the morning when Roland was rescued--most effusive in her expressions
of regard and compassion, though she was perhaps the most useless
assistant a nurse could have in a sick room, the air of which 'so
oppressed her poor little head;' and thus she was secretly not
ill-pleased when her services there were firmly, but politely,
dispensed with by old Mrs. Drugget, the portly housekeeper, who had
nursed Roland and his dead brother many a time in their earlier
years, and now made herself, as of old, mistress of the situation.

Annot's bearing on the eventful morning referred to rankled in the
memory of Maude and Hester.  They strove to dissemble and veil their
growing dislike to, and mistrust of, her under their old bearing and
cordiality of habit; but almost in vain, despite her winning,
clinging, and child-like ways and pretty tricks of manner.  These
seemed to fall flatly now on ear and eye, and soon events were to
transpire with regard to that young lady which gave them cause for
much speculation, suspicion, and positive anger.

She was soon sharp enough to discover that there was a growing cloud
between them, and took the precaution of giving a hint thereof to
Roland.  She was somewhat of a flirt, he knew very well; but there
was no one in the house to flirt with, now that Malcolm Skene and all
the others were gone; and he had consoled himself with the reflection
that she was devoted to him, and that her little flirtations had been
of a harmless nature, and the outcome of a spirit of fun and
_espièglerie_.

And if Hester and Maude were somewhat disposed to be severe on Annot
and reprehend this, he knew by experience that ladies who adopt the
_rôle_ of pleasing the opposite sex are rarely appreciated by their
fair sisters.

Mrs. Lindsay when she visited Roland from time to time, as he thought
to watch his progress towards health and departure, felt thankful,
though of course she gave no hint thereof, that her brother had at
least no active hand in the misfortune that had befallen him.

'The guests I somewhat intrusively invited here are all gone, Mrs.
Lindsay,' said he on one occasion, 'and I shall soon relieve you, I
hope, of the trouble my own presence gives you.'

'Captain Lindsay--Roland--do not talk so,' she replied, either
feeling some compunction then for the false position of them both, or
veiling her old constitutional dislike of him, which, Roland cared
not now.  Calm, cold, self-contained, and self-possessed, Mrs.
Lindsay, as usual, was beautifully and tastefully dressed in rich
black material, with fine lace lappets over her thick, fair hair, and
setting off her colourless and lineless face.  Her expression, we
have said elsewhere, was not ill-tempered but generally hard and
unsympathetic, and now it was softer than Roland had ever seen it,
and something of a smile like watery sunshine hovered about her thin
and firm lips, and to his surprise she even stroked his hair with
something of maternal kindness as she left him, pleased simply
because he had uttered some passing compliment to the effect that he
was glad to see her looking so well and in such good health.  But she
and Maude were not, never were, and never could be, friends.

'I should like to know precisely the secret of this prison house,'
thought the observant Annot, as she saw this unusual action.

If a 'prison house,' it suited her tastes admirably; but she was
fated to learn some of the secrets thereof sooner perhaps than she
wished.

A month and more had passed now; Roland was becoming convalescent; he
could even enjoy a cigar or pipe with Jack Elliot, and had been
promoted from his bed to a couch in a cosy corner of his room; and he
felt that now the time had come when he ought to break to Annot the
true story of how monetary matters stood with him at Earlshaugh.

A heavy feeling gathered in his heart as this conviction forced
itself upon him--a sensation as of lead; yet he scorned to think that
he would have to cast himself upon her generosity, or ask for her
pity.

Compared with what might and ought to have been, his prospects now
were, in many respects, gloomy to look forward to; but he had fully
taken breathing time before breaking to her news which, he greatly
feared, might be testing and grievously disappointing.

But it would be unmanly to trifle longer with Annot, or dally with
their mutual fate.  Yet how was he to preface the most unwelcome
intelligence that he was no longer--indeed, never was--laird of that
stately mansion and splendid estate, with all its fields, wood, and
waters?

How he dreaded the humiliating revelation--yet why so, if she loved
him?

Taking an opportunity when they were alone, and the two other girls,
escorted by Elliot, had gone for a 'spin' on horseback, he drew her
tenderly towards him, with one arm round her slender waist and one
hand clasping hers, which still had his engagement ring on a
baby-like finger, while gazing earnestly down into her sunny eyes,
which were uplifted to his with something of inquiry in them, he said:

'I have news, darling--terrible news to reveal to you at last.'

'News?' she repeated in a whisper.

'Of a nature, perhaps, beyond your imagining,' said he in a voice
that became low and husky despite its tenderness.

'What do you mean, Roland?  You frighten me, dearest!'

He pressed her closer to him, and she felt that his hands were
trembling violently.

'Annot, I have a hundred times and more heard you say that you loved
me for myself, and would continue to love me were I poor--poor as Job
himself.'

'Of course I have often said so, and I do love you; but why do you
ask this question now?  What has happened?  Why are you so strange?'
she asked, changing colour and looking decidedly restless in eye and
manner.  'Are you not well?  How cold your poor hands are, and how
they tremble!'

She drooped her fairy-like head, with all its wealth of shining
golden hair, upon his shoulder, and looked upward keenly, if
tenderly, into his downcast eyes.

'Has any new calamity occurred to distress you?'

'Nothing that is new--to me.'

'Why, then--

'It is this.  I am not Lindsay of Earlshaugh--not the owner of the
estate I mean.  I am poor, poor, Annot, yet not penniless; I have my
old allowance and my pay--but this beautiful estate is not mine.'

'Not yours?'

'No--not a foot of it--not a tree--not a stone!'

Her lips were firmly set, and the rose-leaf tint in her delicate
cheeks died away.

'Whose, then, is it?'

'My father--weakly--my father----'

'To whom did he leave the property?' she asked, lifting her head from
his shoulder and speaking with a sharpness he did not then notice;
'is it as I have heard whispered?'

'To my stepmother--yes.  You knew of that--you suspected it, my
darling?' he added, with a sudden access of hope and joy--hope in her
unselfishness and purity of love.

She made no immediate reply.

'Is this unjust will tenable?' she asked, after a time.

'It is without flaw, Annot.  My father left her all he possessed,
with the power of bequeathing it to whom she pleases, without
hindrance or restriction.'

'Cruel and infamous!  And who, my poor Roland, is her heir?'

'That reptile, Hawkey Sharpe, I presume.'

Something between a gasping sigh and a nervous laugh escaped Annot,
who said, after a little pause, during which he regarded her fair
face with intense and yearning anxiety:

'I thought you as prosperous a gentleman as the Thane of Cawdor
himself; but this is terrible--terrible!'

And as she spoke there was something in her tone that jarred
painfully on his then sensitive and overstrung nerves.


Annot assured him of her unalterable love, whatever lay before
them--whatever happened or came to pass--was he not her own--her very
own!  She wound her arms about his neck; she caressed him in her
sweet, and to all appearance, infantile way, striving to reassure
him; to soothe, console, and implant fresh confidence in his torn and
humbled heart; but with all this, there was a new and curious ring in
her voice--a want of something in its tone, and erelong in her eye
and manner, that stung him keenly and alarmed him.

What did this mean?  Did she resent his supposed duplicity as to his
means and position?  But he consoled himself that he would soon have
her away from Earlshaugh, with all its influences, associations, and
the false hopes and impressions it had given her, and then she would
be his own--his own indeed.

'How loving, how true, gentle, and good she is!  Do I indeed deserve
such disinterested affection?' were his constant thoughts.

He disliked, however, to find that Annot had begun to cultivate the
friendship of Mrs. Lindsay--"Deb Sharpe" as she was uncompromisingly
called by Maude, who was always on most distant terms with that
personage; and to find that she was ever in or about her rooms, doing
little acts of daughter-like attention such as Maude, with all her
sweetness of disposition, had never accorded; even to fondling,
feeding, and washing her snarling pug Fifine; and Mrs. Lindsay, of
whom other ladies had always been rather shy, and towards whom they
had always comported themselves somewhat coldly and with that cutting
hauteur which even the best bred women can best assume, felt
correspondingly grateful to the little London beauty for her
friendship and recognition.

The splendour of the house, the richness of the ancient furniture and
appurtenances, the delicacies of the table, the attendance, the
comfortable profusion of everything, had been duly noted and duly
appreciated by Annot, and she felt that it was with sincere regret
she would quit the fleshpots of Earlshaugh.

More than once, when promenading about the corridors with the aid of
a stick, Roland had surprised her in tears.

'Tears--my darling--why--what!' he began.

'It is nothing,' she replied, with a little flush.  'I am oppressed,
I suppose, by the emptiness and size of this great house.  I am such
an impressionable little thing you know, Roland.'

'We can't amend the size of the house,' said he, smiling, 'but a
cosier and a smaller one awaits us elsewhere, when you are my dear
little wife, and we quit this place, once so dear to me, as I never
thought to quit it in disgust--for ever!'

Seeing the varying moods of Annot, and the occasional petulance, even
coldness, with which she sometimes ventured to treat Roland now,
Hester, remembering that young lady's confidences with reference to
Mr. Bob Hoyle and other 'detrimentals,' her avowed passion for money,
and how a moneyed match was a necessity of her life, and knowing
Roland's changed position and fortunes--Hester, we say, was not slow
in putting 'two and two together,' to use a common adage, to the
detriment of Annot in her estimation.

'I would that I were a strong-minded woman,' said the latter
reproachfully, as she and Roland lingered one evening in a corridor
that was a veritable picture gallery (for there hung the Lindsays of
other days, as depicted by the brushes of the Jamesons, the Scougals,
De Medinas, Raeburns, and Watsons in the striking costumes of their
times), and Roland had been taking her a little to task for some of
her petulant remarks.

'A strong-minded woman,' he repeated.  'Nonsense!  But why?'

'Then I should cease to annoy you, and join an Anglican Sisterhood,
to nurse the poor and all that sort of thing.'

She pouted prettily as she spoke--sweetly, with all her softest
dimples coming into play.

'Are you not perfectly happy, Annot?'

'Oh, yes--yes!' she exclaimed, and interlaced her fingers on his arm;
yet he eyed her moodily, and lovingly, ignorant of the secret source
of her discontent or disquietude.

'How can I take her to task,' thought he; 'already too! so fair, so
bright, with her hair like spun gold!'

He tried to catch and retain her loving glance, but the corners of
her pretty mouth were drooping, and her eyes of pale hazel looked
dreamily and vacantly out on the far extent of sunlit park and the
white fleecy clouds that floated above it; but he thought he read
that in her face which made him long for health and strength to take
her away from Earlshaugh to the new home he had now begun to picture,
and seldom a day passed now without something occuring to increase
this wish.

'Roland,' said Maude on one occasion, as she drove him out through
the pleasant lanes in her pretty pony phaeton, 'that odious creature
Hawkey Sharpe is still, I understand, hovering about here.'

'Bent on mischief, you think?'

'Too probably.'

'Well, I am powerless to prevent him.  He is, you know, his sister's
factotum and now all but Laird of Earlshaugh.'

Though possessing no brilliant beauty, the face of the sunny-haired
Maude was one usually full of merriment, and capable of expressing
intense tenderness--one winning beyond all words; but it grew cloudy
and stern at the thought of 'these interlopers,' as she always called
them--Deborah Sharpe and her obnoxious brother.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE PRESENTIMENT.

Among her letters one morning--though her chief correspondent was her
father, the old Indian veteran at Merlwood, whose shaky caligraphy
there was no mistaking--there came one which gave Hester a species of
electric shock.  It bore the postmarks 'Egypt' and 'Cairo,' with
stamps having the Pyramids and Sphinx's head thereon.

'From Malcolm Skene!' she said to herself; 'Malcolm Skene, and to
_me_!'

She hurried to her room that she might read it in solitude, for it
was impossible that she could fail to do so with deep interest after
all that Malcolm Skene had said to her, and the knowledge of all that
might have been--yea, yet perhaps might be; but the letter, dated
more than a month before at Cairo, simply began:--


'MY DEAR MISS MAULE,

'My excuse for writing to you,' he continued, 'is--and your pardon
must be accorded to me therefore--that I am ordered on a distant,
solitary, and perilous duty, from which I have, for the first time in
my life, a curious, yet solemn, presentiment that I shall never
return.

'This emotion may, please God, be a mistake; and I hope so, for my
dear mother's sake.  It may only be that superstition which some deem
impiety; but we Skenes of Dunnimarle have had it in more than one
generation--a kind of foreknowledge of what was to happen to us, or
to be said or done by those we met.  As some one has it, the map of
coming events is before us, and the spirit surveys it, and for the
time we are translated into another sphere, and re-act, perhaps,
foregone scenes.  Be that as it may, the unbidden emotion of
presentiment seems to have some affinity to that phenomenon.'


'What a strange letter; and how unlike Malcolm--thoughtful and grave
as he is!' was Hester's idea.


'I read a few days ago that some calamity had occurred at Earlshaugh;
that my dear old friend and comrade Roland had met with an
accident--had _disappeared_!  What did that mean?  But too probably I
shall never learn now, and, as I have not again seen the matter
referred to in print, hope it may all be a canard--a mistake.

'You remember our last interview?  Oh, Hester, while life remains to
me I shall never, never forget it?  I think or hope you may care for
me now in pity as we are separated--or might learn to care for me at
a future time.  Tell me to wait that time; if I return from my
mission, Hester, and I shall do so--yea, were it seven years, if you
wish it to be--if at the end of those seven years you would lay your
dear hand in mine and tell me that you would be my wife.

'The waiting would be hard; yet, if inspired by hope, I would undergo
it, Hester, and trust while life was spared to me.  We are told that
"the meshes of our destiny are spinning every day," silently, deftly,
and we unconsciously aid in the spinning--scarcely knowing that--as
we stumble through the darkness to the everlasting light--the dangers
we have passed by, and the fires we have passed through, are all, in
different ways, the process that makes us godlike, strong and free.'


Much more followed that was a little abstruse, and then he seemed to
become loving and tender in spite of the manner in which he strove to
modify his letter.


'I depart in an hour, and tide what may, my last thoughts will ever
be of you--my last wish a prayer for your happiness!  My life's
love--my life's love, for such you are still--once more farewell!

'MALCOLM SKENE.'


Certainly the gentle-hearted Hester could not but be moved by this
letter, coming as it did under all the circumstances from the writer
in a remote and perilous land.  She looked at the date after perusing
the letter more than once, and her spirit sank with a dread of what
might have transpired since then.

She recalled vividly the face of Malcolm Skene, and his eyes, that
were soft yet full of power, more frequently grave than merry, and
his firm lips.  He was a man whose features and bearing would have
been remarkable amid any group of men, and the first to arrest a
woman's attention and arouse her interest.

But as she re-read his expressions of love she shook her handsome
head slowly and gravely, and thought with Collins:

  Friendship often ends in love,
  But love in friendship never!'

To this letter a terrible sequel was close at hand.  This she found
in the newspapers of the following day, and while her whole mind was
full of that remarkable and most unexpected missive to which she
could send no answer:


'Captain Malcolm Skene, who with a native guide quitted Cairo some
weeks ago, has not been heard of since he entered the Wady Faregh, at
a point more than ten Egyptian _shoni_ or thirty miles British,
beyond Memphis, which was not in his direct way.

'This energetic and distinguished young officer is the bearer of
despatches to the Egyptian Colonel commanding a Camel Battery and
Black Battalion near Dayer-el-Syrian, which district he certainly had
not reached when the latest intelligence came from that somewhat
desolate quarter.

'Doubts are now--when too late--entertained as to the fidelity of
Hassan Abdullah, his guide.  A camel supposed to have been his has
been found dead of thirst in the desert, and as there have been some
dreadful sand-storms in that district, the greatest fears are
entertained at headquarters that Captain Skene has perished in the
wilderness--dying in the execution of his duty to his Queen and
country, as truly and as bravely as if he had met a soldier's death
in battle.'


The paper slipped from Hester's hands, and she sank forward till her
forehead rested on the sill of a window near which she sat.  She knew
this paragraph meant too probably a terrible and unknown death, the
harrowing details of which might--nay, too surely, never would--be
revealed--death to one who had loved her but too well, and thus all
her soul became instinct with a tender and fearful interest in him.

'Poor Malcolm--poor Malcolm Skene!' she murmured again and again,
while her face, ashy white, was hidden in her hands.

Few women can fail to take a tender interest in the fate or future of
any man who has been _interested_ in them.

For a long time she sat still--nay, still as a statue, but for the
regular and slow rising and falling of the ribbons and lace at her
bosom, and the ruffling of her dark brown hair in the breeze that
came through the open window, kissing her white temples and cooling
her eyelids.

Then she recalled her father's strange and weird story of his
father's dream, vision, or presentiment, before the storming of
Jhansi, where the latter fell; and thought with wonder, could such
things be?

She confided the letter and its contents to her bosom friend Maude;
but she could not--for cogent reasons--bring herself to say a word on
the subject to Roland, whose mind, however, was full enough of the
newspaper report of his old friend's misfortune, or as he never
doubted now--evil fate!




CHAPTER XXXV.

LOST IN THE DESERT.

Natheless his somewhat gloomy letter to Hester Maule, Malcolm Skene,
though feeling to the fullest extent the influence of the
presentiment of evil therein referred to, was too young, and of too
elastic a nature, not to feel also a sense of ardour, enterprise, and
enthusiasm at the confidence reposed in him by his superiors.  With
an inherent love of adventure and a certain recklessness of spirit,
he armed himself, mounted, and quitted his quarters at Cairo just
when the first red rays of the morning sun were tipping with light
the summit of the citadel or the apex of each distant pyramid, and
rode on his solitary way--solitary all save Hassan, the swarthy
Egyptian guide provided for him by the Quartermaster-General's
Department.

He had been chiefly selected for the duty in question--to bear
despatches to the _Amir-Ali_, or Colonel, commanding the Egyptian
force at Dayr-el-Syrian, in consequence of his proficiency in
Arabic--the most prevailing language of the country.

He and his guide were mounted on camels.  Skene's was one of great
beauty, if an animal so ungainly can be said to possess it, with a
small head, short ears, and bending neck.  Its tail was long, its
hoofs small, and it was swift of action.  The rider was without
baggage; he wore his fighting kit of Khakee cloth and tropical helmet
with a pugaree.  He had his sword and revolver, with goggles, and a
pocket compass for use if his guide in any way proved at fault.

Unnoticed he traversed the picturesque streets that lay between the
citadel and the gate that led by a straight road towards the castle
and gardens of Ghizeh, passing the groups and features incident to
Cairo: a lumbering train of British baggage waggons, escorted by our
soldiers in clay-coloured khakee with bayonets fixed; an Egyptian
officer in sky-blue uniform and red tarboosh 'tooling' along on a
circus-like Arab; a whole regiment of darkies, perhaps with rattling
drums and French bugles; strings of maimed, deformed, and blind
beggars; private carriages with outriders in Turkish costumes of
white muslin with gold embroideries, and bare-legged grooms; 'the
gallant, gray donkeys of which Cairo is so proud, and which the
Cairenes delight in naming after European celebrities, from Mrs.
Langtry to Lord Wolseley;' singers of Nubian and Arabian songs and
dealers in Syrian magic, all were left behind, and in the cool air of
the morning Malcolm Skene found himself ambling on his camel under
the shadows of the lebbek trees, with wading buffaloes and flocks of
herons on either side of the road as he skirted the plain where the
Pyramids stand--the Pyramids that mock Time, which mocks all things.

He was too familiar with them then to bestow on them more than a
passing glance, and rode forward on his somewhat lonely way.  Hassan,
his guide, like a true Arab, uttered a mocking yell on seeing the
vast stony face of the Sphinx--an efrit--fired a pistol, and threw
stones at it, as at a devil, and then civilization was left behind.

Trusting to his guide Hassan, Skene was taken a few miles off his
direct route southward down the left bank of the Nile, and while
riding on, turning from time to time to converse with that personage,
who was a typical Fellah--very dark-skinned, with good teeth, black
and sparkling eyes, muscular of form, yet spare of habit, and clad
simply in loose blue cotton drawers with a blue tunic and red
tarboosh--it seemed that his face and voice were somehow not
unfamiliar to him.

But where, amid the thousands of low-class Fellaheen in Cairo, could
Malcolm Skene have seen the former or heard the latter?  Never before
had he heard of Hassan Abdullah even by name.  But 'strange it is,
for how many days and weeks we may be haunted by a _likeness_ before
we know what it is that is gladdening us with sweet recollections, or
vexing us with some association we hoped to have left behind.'

Memphis, with its ruins and mounds, in the midst of which stand the
Arab hamlets of Sokkara and Mitraheny, was traversed with some
difficulty, though the site is now chiefly occupied by waste and
marshes that reach to the sand-hills on the edge of the desert; but
from Abusir all round to the west and south, for miles, Skene and his
guide found themselves stepping from grave to grave amid bones and
fragments of mummy cloth--the remains of that wondrous necropolis
which, according to Strabo, extended half a day's journey each way
from the great city of Central Egypt.

'Ugh!' muttered Malcolm Skene, as he guided the steps of his camel
and lighted more than one long havannah, 'this is anything but
lively!  What a dismal scene!'

'The work of the Pharaohs,' said Hassan, for to them everything is
attributed by the Fellaheen, who suppose they lived about three
hundred years ago.

But Memphis was ere long left in his rear, and night was at hand,
when--according to Hassan Abdullah's statement, on computation of
distance--they should reach and halt at certain wells, about ten
_shoni_ distant therefrom, in the direct line to the Wady Faregh.

Memphis was, we say, left behind, and the two rode swiftly on.  His
former thoughts recurring to him, Malcolm Skene, checking his camel
to let that of his guide come abreast of him, said to the latter:

'Your face is singularly familiar to me.  Did we ever meet in Cairo?'

Hassan grinned and showed all his white teeth, but made no reply.

'Your face _has_ some strange mystery for me,' resumed Skene, with
growing wonder, yet fearing he might make the man think he possessed
the evil eye; 'it seems a face known to me--the face of the dead in
the garb of the living.'

'And it is so, _Yusbashi_ (captain), so far as _you_ are concerned,'
was the strange reply of the Fellah as his black eyes flashed.

'What do you mean?'

'We met in the roulette saloon of Pietro Girolamo.'

'Right!  I remember now; you are one of the fellows I fought with.  I
thought you were killed in that row!'

'Nearly so I was, and by _you_.'

This was an awkward discovery.

'But you escaped?'

'Yes; thanks to an amulet I wear--a verse of the Koran bound round my
left arm.'

To trust such a rascal as Skene now supposed this fellow must be was
full of peril.  To return and seek another guide, when he had
proceeded so far upon his way, would argue timidity, and tempt the
'chaff' of the more heedless spirits of the mess; thus it was not to
be thought of.

He could but continue his journey with his despatches, and watch well
every movement of his guide; but to have as such one of the ruffians
and bullies of Pietro Girolamo was certainly an unpleasant
discovery--one with whom he had already that which in these parts of
the world is termed a _blood feud_, seemed to be the first instalment
of his gloomy presentiment.

Hassan Abdullah had been--he could not conceive how or why--chosen or
recommended as a guide by those in authority; and if false, or
disposed to be so, he veiled it under an elaborate bearing of
servility and attention to every wish and hint of Skene.  Thinking
that he could not make any better of the situation now, Malcolm was
fain to accept that bearing for what it might be worth, and, to veil
his mistrust, adopted a new tone with Hassan, and instead of
listening to directions from him, began to give orders instead.  But,
ignorant as he was of the route, this system could not long be
pursued.

As he rode on he thought of Hester Maule, and how she would view or
consider his letter.  Would she answer it?  He scarcely thought she
would do so--nay, became certain she would not.  Under the
circumstances in which they had parted after that interview in the
conservatory at Earlshaugh, and with the grim presentiment then
haunting him, it was beseeming enough in him perhaps to have written
as he did to her; but not for her to write him in reply unless she
meant to hold out hopes that might never be realized.

What amount of ground they had traversed when the sun verged westward
Malcolm scarcely knew, as the way had been most devious, rough, and
apparently, to judge of the guide's indecision more than once, very
uncertain; but the former judged that it could not have been more
than thirty miles from Memphis as the crow flies.

Dhurra reeds, date, and cotton-trees had long since been left behind,
and before the camel-riders stretched a pale yellow waste of sand,
strewed in places by glistening pebbles.  Malcolm Skene thought they
were now entering the lower end of the Wady Faregh, between El Benat
and the Wady Rosseh, and on consulting his pocket-compass supposed
the Dayr Macarius Convent must be right in his front, but distant
many miles, and the post of Dayr-el-Syrian, for which he was bound,
must be about ten miles further on; but Hassan Abdullah knew better;
and when near sunset that individual dismounted and spread his dirty
little square carpet whereon to say his orisons, with his face
towards Mecca, his head bowed, his beads in his dingy hands, and his
cunning eyes half closed.  None would have thought that a Mussulman
apparently so pious had only hate and perfidy in his heart for the
trusting but accursed infidel, or _Frenchi_, as he called Skene--the
general name in Egypt for all Europeans--as the latter seated himself
by the side of a low wall half buried in the drifted sand--the
fragment of some B.C. edifice--and partook of his frugal meat, supper
and dinner combined.

Far, far away in the distance Memphis and the Valley of the Nile were
lost in haze and obscurity; westward the sun, like a ball of fire--a
blood-red disc of enormous proportions--shorn of every ray, was
setting amid a sky of gold, crimson, and soft apple-green, all
blending through each other, yet with light strong enough to send far
along the waste they had traversed the shadows of the two camels of
Skene and of Hassan.

The former recalled with a grim smile Moore's ballad:

  'Fly to the desert, fly with me!'

and thought the desert looked far from inviting.

His only table appurtenance was the jack-knife hung from his neck by
a lanyard, and as issued to all ranks of our troops in Egypt, and
with that he cut his sandwiches, now dry indeed by this time, and
opened a tiny tin of preserved meat, which he washed down by a
mouthful from the hunting-flask, carried in his haversack.

As he sat alone eating his frugal meal, which from religious scruples
Hassan declined to share with him--or indeed anything save a
cigar--Skene, though neither a sybarite nor a gourmand, could not
help thinking regretfully of the regimental mess-table in the citadel
of Cairo, possessing, like other such tables, all the ease of a
kindly family circle, without its probable dulness; of the dressing
bugle, and the merry drums and fifes playing the 'Roast Beef of Old
England;' the quiet weed after dinner, a stroke at billiards, a
rubber of short whist while holding good cards; and just then
civilization and all the good things of this earth seemed very far
off indeed!

When he and Hassan started again to reach the wells--where they were
to procure water for themselves and their camels, and were to bivouac
for the night, no trace of these could be found, though the
travellers wandered several miles in different directions; and, as
the sun set with tropical rapidity, Skene--his water-bottle
completely empty--with his field-glass swept the horizon in vain for
a sight of those gum-trees which were said to indicate the locality
of the springs in question; and then he began more than ever to
mistrust the good faith, if not the knowledge, of Hassan Abdullah.

So far as their camels were concerned, Skene had no cause as yet for
any anxiety, as these animals, besides the four stomachs which all
ruminating quadrupeds possess, have a fifth, which serves as a
reservoir for carrying a supply of water in the parched and sandy
deserts they are so often obliged to traverse.

A well--one unknown to Hassan, apparently--they certainly did come
upon unexpectedly, but, alas! it was dry.  Malcolm Skene looked
thirstily at the white stones that lined or formed it, glistening in
the light of the uprisen moon, and with his tongue parched and lips
hard and baked he thought tantalizingly of brooks of cool and limpid
water, of iced champagne and bitter beer!

He haltered his camel, looked to his arms and laid them half under
him, and resting his head against the saddle of his animal, strove to
court sleep, against the labours of the morrow, thinking the while
that the labours of Sisyphus were almost a joke to the toil of the
duty he had undertaken.

At a little distance on the other side of the dried-up fountain,
Hassan, whom he watched closely for a time, took his repose in a
similar fashion.

The night in the desert was not altogether unpleasant, for that
rarefied clearness of sky which renders the heat of the sun so
intolerable by day, makes the sky of night surpassingly beautiful,
and that is the time when, if he can, the traveller should really
make his way over the sandy waste.

With early morning, and while the red sun was yet below the hazy
horizon, came full awakening after a somewhat restless night, broken
by periods of watchfulness and anxiety, and tantalized by dreams of
flowing and sparkling water, which left the pangs of growing thirst
keener than ever.

Hassan, however, seemed 'fresh as a daisy,' having, as Malcolm
strongly suspected, some secret store of his own selfishly concealed
about him.

They gave their camels a feed of their favourite food, the twigs of
some thorny mimosa that grew near the dried-up well--scanty herbage
of the desert--and then Malcolm, who distrusted the skill or fealty,
or both, of Hassan Abdullah, while the latter was kneeling on his
prayer carpet, turned to consult his pocket compass with reference to
the direction in which to steer through the waste of sand which now
spread in every direction around them.

It was gone!

Nervously, with fingers that trembled in their haste, he searched his
haversack, turning out its few contents again and again, and cast
keen glances all around where he had been overnight, but no sign or
trace of that invaluable instrument, on which too probably his life
depended, was there!

Fiercely he turned to Hassan, then just ending his morning prayer and
folding up his carpet, suspecting that the soft and swift-handed
Egyptian must have filched it from him during sleep--yet he had felt
so wakeful that such could scarcely be the case.

'My compass!' he exclaimed.

'What of it, _Yusbashi_?'

'Have you seen it?'

'I--not I; and if I did, do you think I would touch it?'

'It is _ifrit_--the work of the devil--an affair of which I, as a
true Mussulman, can know nothing.'

'But how about the way to go now?' said Malcolm Skene in genuine
perplexity and alarm, looking all around the vicinity of the stony
hole, called a well, for the twentieth time.

'The _Frenchi_ will be told all of the way that his servant knows,'
replied Hassan with a profound salaam, while bending his head to hide
the leer of his stealthy and glittering eyes.

Skene thought for a moment.  Should he take this fellow at his word;
threaten him with death if he did not produce the pocket compass, or
knock him down with the butt-end of his pistol and then search his
pockets?

An open quarrel was to be avoided.  Skene felt himself to be a good
deal, if not wholly, at the fellow's mercy.  The latter could only
delude him so far, at the risk of perilling himself; but he might, on
the other hand, lure and betray him into the hands of the enemy,
several of whom, under a leader named Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil, were
hovering on the skirts of the desert in various directions--a man
known to have been a faithful adherent and kinsmen of the captive
Zebehr Pasha.

Nothing seemed to remain for Skene but to accept as before the
guidance of Hassan Abdullah, so, after the latter had breakfasted on
a few dates and the former on a simple ration from his haversack,
once more they headed their course into what seemed to be an endless
and markless waste of sand.

Apart from the bodily pangs of thirst, anger, doubt, and anxiety were
gathering in the mind of Malcolm; but he sternly resolved that the
moment he became assured of Hassan Abdullah deluding or betraying him
he would shoot that copper-coloured individual dead, as if he were a
reptile or a wild beast.  And Hassan no doubt knew quite enough of
life in his own country to be aware that he rode on with his life in
his hands.

So another night and day passed away.

And now, as we have referred to the desert here and elsewhere in the
Soudan, it may seem the time to give a description of what such a
waste is, and the scene that now spread before the anxious and
bloodshot eyes of Malcolm Skene; for it has been justly said that he
who has never travelled through such a place can form no idea of a
locality so wondrous--one in which all the ordinary conditions of
human life undergo a complete change.

Once away from the valley of the Nile, all between the fourteenth
degree and the shore of the Mediterranean, a tract of more than eight
hundred thousand square miles _is desert_, treeless, waterless,
without streams or rivulets, and almost without wells, which, when
they exist, are scanty, few, and far apart.  'The first thing after
reaching a well,' says a recent writer, 'is to ascertain the quantity
and quality of its water.  As to the former, it may have been
exhausted by a preceding caravan, and hours may be required for a new
supply to ooze in again.  The quality of the desert water is
generally bad, the exception being when it becomes worse, though long
custom enables the Bedouins to drink water so brackish as to be
intolerable to all except themselves and their flocks.  Well do I
remember how at each well the first skinful was tasted all round as
epicures sip rare wines.  Great was the joy if it was pronounced
_moya helwa_, "sweet water;" but if the Bedouins said _moosh tayib_,
"not good," we might be sure it was a solution of Epsom salts.'

The desert now traversed by Skene was composed of coarse sand,
abounding in some places with shells, pebbles, and a species of salt.
In some parts the soil was shifting, and so soft that the feet--even
of his camel--sank into it at every step; at others it was hard as
beaten ground.  Here and there grew a few patches of prickly plants,
such as he remembered to have seen in botanic gardens at home, with
small hillocks of drifted sand gathered round them; and as he rode on
he felt as if he had about him the awful sensations of vastness,
silence, and the sublimity of a calm and waveless ocean--but an ocean
of sand, arid, and gloomy, dispiriting and suggestive of death--but
to the European only; as the Bedouins, whose native soil it is, are,
beyond all other nations and races, gay and cheerful.

During August and September the winds in Egypt retain a northerly
direction, and the weather is generally moderate; but Malcolm Skene
was in the desert now, and under the peculiar influences of that
peculiar region.

Then at times is to be encountered the mirage, or Spirit of the
Desert, as the Arabs call it, when the eyes of the wanderer there are
deluded by the seeming motion of distant waves; of tall and graceful
palms tossing feathery leaves in the distance, when only the
sun-scorched sand is lying, mocking him with the false show of what
his soul longs for, and his overheated brain depicts in glowing
colours.

Riding mechanically on--uncomfortably, too, all unused as he was to
the strange ambling action of a camel--oppressed by thirst which he
could see no means of quenching, and knowing not when he might be
able to do so--oppressed, too, by the glare of a cloudless sun
growing hotter and hotter--more mighty than ever it seemed to be
before--Malcolm Skene was soon to become conscious that the sense of
vision was not the only one by which the mysterious desert mocks its
sojourner with fantastic tricks; and once he became sensible of that
strange and bewildering phenomena referred to by the author of
'Eothen' in his experiences of Eastern travel.

He seemed, overpowered by the heat, to fall slowly asleep--was it for
moments or minutes?--he knew not; but he seemed also to be suddenly
awakened by the familiar but far-off sounds of drums beating, to the
wailing of a bagpipe playing 'The March of Lochiel,' as he had often
heard it played by the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders, in the
citadel of Cairo.

He started and listened, his first idea being naturally that he was
partly under the power of a dream; but it seemed as if minutes passed
ere these sounds, in steady marching cadence, became fainter and then
died away.

Utterly bewildered, he was quite awake now.  Under the same
influence, and in the same place, it was the bells of his native
village that were heard by the writer referred to, and who says: 'I
attribute the effect to the great heat of the sun, the perfect
dryness of the clear air through which I moved, and the deep
stillness of all around me.  It seemed to me that these causes, by
occasioning a great tension and susceptibility of the hearing organs,
rendered them liable to tingle under the passing touch of some new
memory that must have swept across my brain in a moment of sleep.'

And so doubtless it was with Malcolm Skene, who, sunk in thought and
lassitude, was pondering deeply over the strange dream--if dream it
was--when he was roused by the voice of Hassan Abdullah, as it
amounted to something like a shriek.

'The _Zobisha_--the _Zobisha_!' he exclaimed, with a terror that was
too genuine to be affected in any way.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

ALONE!

It was about noon, now, and with a start, roused from his day-dream
and half-apathy, Malcolm Skene looked about him and saw that he had
then to face one of the most appalling, yet sublime, sights of the
desert--a sand-storm--at that season when the Egyptian winds approach
the Southern tropic, and they are more variable and tempestuous than
during any other season of the year--a state in which they remain
till February.

Distant about two miles, he suddenly saw the _Zobisha_, as Hassan
called it--several lofty pillars of sand travelling over the waste
with wondrous swiftness.  The tallest was vertical, the others seemed
to lean towards it, and, at the bases of all, the sand rose as if
lashed by a whirlwind into a raging sea, amid which tough mimosa
bushes were uprooted and swept away like feathers.

The whirlwind subsided, but the mighty cloud of sand and small
pebbles which it had raised high in the darkened heavens, almost to
the zenith, continued to tower before the two sojourners in the
desert for more than an hour--purple, dun, and yellow in hue at
times, and anon all blended together.

Brave though he was, a nameless dread such as he had never felt
before possessed the soul of Skene at a sight so unusual and
terrific; and there flashed upon his mind the recollection of his
letter to Hester, and how true his presentiment seemed to be proving
now, for he felt on the verge of suffocation.

Hassan Abdullah, who in his prayers usually sighed for the Paradise
of the Prophet, with his seventy houris awaiting him in their couches
of hollow pearl, the fruits of the Tree of Toaba, and springs of
unlimited lemonade, now prayed only for his own safety, while both
their camels forgot their usual docility, and became well nigh
unmanageable with terror.

The air was full of impalpable dust.  To avoid suffocation or
blindness therefrom, Skene dismounted, tied his gauze pugaree tightly
over his face, and placing his camel between him and the skirt of the
blast, which now developed into a wind-storm, sweeping the column of
sand with wondrous speed before it, stooped his head close to the
saddle and held on to a stirrup-leather.

On came the wind-storm, and before he had time to think, to express
wonder to Hassan as to what it could be, the tornado swept over the
desert, carrying before it mimosa bushes and cacti, clouds of shining
pebbles, the withered fragments of an old gum-tree, and the white
bones of a dead camel.

How his animal withstood the sharp and sweeping blast that darkened
all around them, Malcolm Skene knew not; but he found his hands torn
from the stirrup-leather, and himself flung furiously and helplessly
amid the sand, which half covered him.

After a time, gasping, with his throat, nostrils, and ears full of
dust, he struggled to his feet and looked around him, and saw,
already far distant, the sand-cloud borne away by the mighty wind,
then in its wild career to some other quarter of the desert.

Above him the sky was again cloudless; the air all still and clear;
the awful and angry rush of the wind-storm was past.

But where was Hassan Abdullah?

A speck vanishing away in the far distance showed but too plainly
where he had gone with all the speed his camel could achieve--a
natural swiftness now accelerated by the extremity of fear; and in
another minute even that moving speck disappeared, and Malcolm Skene
found himself alone--guideless and ignorant of which way to turn his
steps in the appalling solitude of the desert.

What was he to do now?

Follow in the route Hassan had taken, and which that wily personage
no doubt knew led to some haunt of men, or abode of such civilization
as existed there?

Even that he could not do.  The horizon showed no point to indicate
where the speck he knew to be Hassan and his camel had vanished.

Malcolm's alarm for the future exceeded his just anger and
indignation for the present at this sudden and unexpected desertion;
but action of some kind became necessary, and though apparently he
could not be worse off than where he was, every step he took might be
leading further from the path he should pursue to
Dayr-el-Syrian--further from a well or succour, and nearer to 'dusty
death.'

After glancing at the trappings of his camel, he remounted and rode
forward slowly, fain to suck for a moment even a hot pebble of the
desert in hope to produce a little moisture in his mouth, while
consulting a small pocket map he possessed.

If Hassan had not misled him wilfully, and they had not overshot the
proper distance, to judge by the position of the sun, he supposed
that Dayr-el-Syrian, where the Amir-Ali's command was encamped,
should be somewhere on his right; but, if so, ere this he should have
come to the sequestered Macarius Convent--so called from St. Macarius
the Elder, of Egypt, a shepherd of the fourth century, who (so runs
the story) dwelt for sixty years in the desert; but of that edifice
he saw no sign or vestige, and he saw, by the same map, that if he
had _passed_ it and gone through the extreme end of the Wady Faregh,
then before him must lie the 'Petrified Forest,' of which he knew
nothing, and of which he had never heard before, lying apparently
more than a hundred miles westward of Cairo--a distance which it
seemed almost incredible he had so nearly travelled, and the very
name of which was suggestive of something of horror and dismay.

Again and again, with hollow and haggard eyes, he swept the desert
through his field-glass, seeking to note a bush or tree that might
indicate where a fountain lay; but in vain, and the pangs of thirst
increased till they became gnawing and maddening.

He would certainly die soon!

More than once he looked, too, in the desperate hope of seeing
Abdullah returning; but equally in vain.

As he rode on under the scorching sun--scorching even while
setting--with his head nodding on his breast through weakness, there
came before him day-dreams of runnels of gushing water--their very
sound seemed to be in his ears--of 'a wee burnie wimpling under the
lang yellow broom,' in the shady woods of Dunnimarle, and the rustle
of their leaves seemed overhead!

The poor old mother there, to whom he was as the apple of her
eye--Hester too--would never know of all he endured and would have to
endure inexorably till the bitter end came; and just then, more than
even his mother, dove-eyed Hester Maule seemed all the world to him!

Well--'Time and the hour run through the roughest day.'

With that appreciation of trifles peculiar to us all in moments of
dire perplexity or intense excitement, he was remarking the vast
length of shadow thrown across the level waste, by the light of the
now nearly level sun--the shadow of himself and his camel--when a
sudden acceleration in the speed of the latter attracted his
attention; it began to glide over the desert sand more swiftly than
ever, guided by some instinct implanted in it by nature, and in a few
minutes it brought him to a little spot of green--an oasis--amid
which, fenced round by stones and large pebbles, lay a pool of water!

'A well--a well--water--water at last!' exclaimed Skene with a prayer
on his lips, as he threw himself beside it.  Forgetting thoughts of
all and everything, past and future, in the mingled agony and joy of
the present, he crawled towards it on hands and knees, tossed aside
his tropical helmet and drank of it deeply, thirstily, greedily,
laving his face and hands in it often, and he was not sure that his
tears did not mingle with the water as he did so--tears of gratitude.

By nature and its physical formation, less athirst than his rider,
the camel drank of the pool too, but scantily.  Skene then filled his
water-bottle with the precious liquid, as if he feared the well might
dry up, even as he watched it; and then (after tethering his camel)
he stretched himself beside it, and, utterly worn out by all he had
undergone in mind and body, fell into a deep and dreamless slumber,
undisturbed alike by flies or mosquitoes.

How long he slept thus he knew not, but day had not broken, and the
waning moon was shining brightly when he awoke.  He was already too
much of a soldier to feel surprise on awaking in a strange bed or
place; but some of his surroundings there were sufficiently strange
to startle him into instant wakefulness and activity.

'It is the Frenchi--the Infidel!' he heard the voice of Hassan
exclaim, and he found himself surrounded by a crowd of armed Arabs,
foremost among whom stood Pietro Girolamo--the rascally Girolamo of
Cairo, who, having made even that city too hot to hold him, had, for
the time, sought refuge with the denizens of the desert.

Partly clad and partly nude, with plaited hair, forms of bronze
colour, their teeth and eyes gleaming bright as the swords and spears
with which they were armed, Malcolm Skene saw some twenty or more
Soudanese warriors, on foot or camel-back, around him, and gave
himself up for lost indeed, as his sword and revolver were
immediately torn from him.

Uttering a yell, Girolamo was rushing upon him with upraised knife,
when he was roughly thrust back by a tall and towering Arab, who
dealt him a sharp blow with the butt-end of his Remington rifle--so
much as to say, 'I command here.'

Clearly seen and defined in the light of a moon which was silvery,
yet brilliant as that of day, Skene saw before him in this personage
an Arab of the Arabs.

His bronzed face was nearly black by nature and exposure to the
scorching tropical sun.  His arms, legs, and neck were bare, and
their muscles stood forth like whipcord.  His nose was somewhat
hawk-like; his eyes were keen as those of a mountain eagle, and his
shark-like teeth were white as ivory, in contrast to the skin of his
leathern visage.

His hair, which flowed under a steel cap furnished with a nasal bar,
was black as night, and shone with an unguent made from crocodile fat
by the fishers of Dongola; and save for his shirt of Dharfour steel
and Mahdi tunic and trousers, he looked like a mummy of the Pharaohs
resuscitated and inspired by a devil.

His arms were a long cross-hilted sword, a dagger, and a Remington
rifle.

Such was the Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil, kinsman of Zebehr Pasha--like
Zebehr, almost the last of the great slave-dealers--and whose
prisoner Malcolm Skene now found himself--whether for good or for
evil, he could not foresee; but his heart too painfully foreboded the
_latter_!

'Sheikh,' said he, 'you will consider me as a prisoner of war, I
trust?'

'We shall see--there are things that are as bad as death, and yet are
not death,' was the grim and enigmatical reply of Moussa Abu Hagil,
which Skene knew referred to torture or mutilation, by having his
hands struck off, like those of some prisoners he had seen.

For many a day after, the friends of Malcolm Skene searched the
public prints in vain for further tidings of him than we have given
three chapters back.

Applications to the War Office and telegrams to headquarters at Cairo
were alike unavailing, and received only the same cold, stereotyped
answer--that nothing was known of the fate of Captain Malcolm Skene
but what the news papers contained.

His supposed fate and story were deemed as parallel with the Palmer
tragedy on the shore of the Red Sea; but more especially with that of
his countryman, Captain Gordon, an enthusiastic soldier, who, missing
Colonel Burnaby's party which he was to accompany with the desert
column, perished in the wilderness, far from the Gakdul track--but
whether at the hands of the Arabs, or by the horrors of thirst, was
never known.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE FIRST QUARREL.

In his anxiety to leave Earlshaugh, Roland writhed under his
convalescence, thus retarding in no small degree his complete
recovery, and keeping him chained to a sofa in his sitting-room, when
otherwise he might have been abroad in the grounds, though the brown
foliage and the falling leaves, with the piping of the autumn winds,
were not calculated much to raise the spirits of the ailing.

The partridges had become wild; the pheasants were still in splendid
order, and cub-hunting was beginning in those districts where it was
in vogue; but no one in Earlshaugh House thought of any of these, yet
cub-hunting, as an earnest of the coming season, had been one of
Roland Lindsay's delights.

However, he had other more serious and bitter things to think of now;
and for cub-hunting or fox-hunting, never again would he set out from
Earlshaugh and feel the joyous enthusiasm roused by seeing the hounds
'feathering' down a furrowed field with all their heads in the air,
or find himself crossing the fertile and breezy Howe of Fife, from
meadow to meadow, and field to field, over burns, hedges, and
five-foot drystone dykes, then standing erect in his stirrups and
galloping as if for life after the streaming pack, as they swept over
'the Muirs of Fife' which merge in the rich and extensive plains of
the famous East Neuk.

Hunt he might elsewhere in the future, but never again where he and
his fathers before him had hunted for generations, though Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe was then actually doing so, and with horses from 'his
sister's' stables at Earlshaugh!

During this period of convalescence and enforced idleness Roland
became conscious of a kind of change--subtle and undefinable--in
Annot.  She--in a spirit of maidenly reserve--was apparently in no
hurry for the completion of arrangements about their marriage.

She left all these _pro tem._ in the hands of 'mamma' in South
Belgravia; and the old lady's letters--changed in tone--were full of
suggested delays, doubts, and difficulties in finally fixing a period
to her daughter's engagement with Roland; the said letters, of
course, bearing on the all-important matter of settlements, which--as
circumstances now stood at Earlshaugh--he was utterly at a loss how
to make without the advice, more than ever, of the family agent, old
Mr. M'Wadsett of Thistle Court.

Meanwhile, full of themselves and their own affairs, and of their
marriage, which was now fixed for an early day, and before Jack
Elliot's return to Egypt, Maude and the latter were less observant
than Hester of what transpired at Earlshaugh during Roland's
convalescence.

Attended by old Buckle, Annot had gone to see the hounds throw off,
and in following the field for some little way contrived to lose her
venerable groom, whom no doubt she deemed a bore; and while he was
searching for her hopelessly over a Fifeshire muir she came home to
one of the park gates attended by a gentleman in hunting costume,
with whom she seemed on pretty intimate terms--a circumstance which,
when mentioned, she laughingly explained away.

But at a subsequent period she was seen by Maude and Hester riding in
the park with one supposed to be the same stranger, but at a
considerable distance.

The two girls could see that the pair were going slowly
together--perhaps their cattle were tired, but, as Maude said, that
was no reason why they should ride so near each other that his right
hand could rest on her saddle-bow.

'Who is he?  I don't like this,' said Maude.

But Hester remained silent and full of her own thoughts.

Other meetings between these two became whispered about, rather
intangibly, however, and then rumour gave the gentleman the name of
Hoyle.

'Hoyle?' thought Hester, and she remembered Annot's confidence about
her Belgravian admirer, 'the Detrimental' Bob Hoyle.

Annot blushed deeply and painfully with a suffusion that dyed her
snowy neck and face to the temples, and which was some time in
passing away, when questioned on this matter by Maude, who she knew
mistrusted her, and falteringly she asked:

'How did you learn his name?'

'It dropped from you incidentally when speaking to Elliot.'

'Did it?' said she, with a pallid lip.

'Yes, when hunting, at a house in the neighbourhood.'

'I--I know no one--I mean no harm--and Roland cannot ride to hounds
just now,' urged Annot, a little piteously, and adopting her
child-like manner.

'Then neither should you, Annot.'

'I will do so no more, Maude--and I give you my word,' she added
emphatically, and with an air of perfect candour, 'that I shall never
again see Mr. Hoyle!'

Then Maude kissed her, but, as she did so, it scarcely required so
close an observer as Hester to detect the actual dislike--all sweet
and lovely as her face was--that lurked under her cousin's affected
cordiality.

But the latter's indignation returned when the pledge was broken.

Deeming all this most unfair to Roland, his sunny-haired sister
consulted with Hester, but that young lady nervously declined to
involve herself in the matter, though Roland nearly took the
initiative one day (when Hester was arranging some fresh flowers in
his room) with reference to Annot's now frequent absences and seeming
neglect of him.

'Does the dear girl shrink from me, Hester,' said he, 'because I am
pale and thin--wasted and feeble--after that cursed accident?'

'Surely not, Roland!'

'It seems very like it, by Jove!' he grumbled almost to himself.

In the dark violet eyes of Hester there shone at that moment, as she
bent over the flower-vases, a strange light--the light that is born
of mingled anger and love.

Maude thought it very strange that in all reports of the meets,
hunting and county packs, etc., the name of Mr. Hoyle never appeared
among others, nor were her suspicions allayed by the idea of Jack
Elliot, that 'he was probably a duffer whose name was not worth
mentioning.'

But gossip was busy, and Roland's loving and tender sister's
complaints of Annot seemed to become the echo of his own secret and
growing thoughts, which rose unpleasantly now on Annot's protracted
absences from his society, and a new and undefinable something in her
manner that, in short, he did not like.

The half-uttered hints of Maude--uttered painfully and reluctantly,
trembling lest she should become a mischief-maker--stung him deeply,
more deeply than he cared to admit.

'What has Annot done now?' he asked on one occasion, tossing on his
sofa and flinging away a half-smoked cigar.  'It seems to me that if
a woman is popular with our sex she becomes intensely the reverse
with her own.'

'Roland,' urged Maude, 'you are unnecessarily severe, on me at least.'

'Well--perhaps the atmosphere of this place is corrupting her; I
don't wonder if it is so; we live here in one of deceit,' said he
bitterly.  'Poor little Maude,' he added more gently, 'home is no
longer home to you now.'

'I shall soon have another,' said Maude, with brightness dancing in
her eyes of forget-me-not blue.

'Bui I must have this matter out with Annot--ask her to come to me.'

And when Annot came, with all her strange and flower-like fairness of
colour and willowy grace, how fragile, soft, and _petite_ she looked,
with her minute little face and wealth of golden hair, her bright
inquiring eyes, their expression just then having something of alarm
mingled with coyness in them!

How could he be angry with her?  What was he to say--how to begin?

We say there was alarm in her expression, for she saw near Roland's
hand his powerful field-glasses, with which he was in the habit of
amusing himself in viewing the far stretch of country extending away
to the distant hills.  He could also view the park, which was much
nearer.

She knew not _whom_ he might have seen there, and the little colour
she had died away.

'What is it, Roland?' she asked; 'you wish to speak with me.'

How terrible it is, says someone, to confront direct and apparently
frank people!  'To state in precise terms the offences of all those
who incur our displeasure would occasion a good deal of humming and
hawing, and, it is to be feared, invention on the part of most of us
in the course of twelve months.  We have wrought ourselves up to the
pitch of a very pretty quarrel, and it is dreadfully embarrassing to
be called upon to state our grounds for it.'

So it was with Roland.  He had worked himself up to a point which he
failed just then to sustain, while in her manner there was a curious
mixture of the caressing and the defiant; but when she tried some of
her infantile and clinging ways, Roland became cold and hard in the
expression of his mouth and eyes, though she hastened to adjust the
sofa-cushion on which his head reclined.

'You wish to speak with me, Maude said,' remarked Annot, in a low
voice, while looking down and somewhat nervously adjusting a flower
in her girdle.

Roland did not reply at once.  She eyed him furtively, and then
laughed.

'I do not understand your mirth,' said he coldly.

'Nor I your gloom, Roland dear; but then you are far from well.'

He sighed, as if deprecating her manner.

'Am I to be scolded, like a naughty child?' she asked.

'You seem to feel that you deserve it.'

'But I won't be scolded--and for what?'

'Acting as you ought not to do.'

'How?'

'Riding to see the hounds throw off, without my knowledge, and
escorted only by an old groom, whose place another has taken more
than once.'

He paused, loth to say more.  His proud soul revolted at the idea of
being jealous--vulgarly, grotesquely jealous of anyone; yet he eyed
her with pain and anger mingled.

'Oh, you refer to Bob Hoyle--poor Bob!  Hester knows about him,' said
Annot, after a little pause, in which she grew, if possible, paler,
and certainly more confused.

'He is not a visitor here--and yet you have been seen with him in the
park and lawn.'

'Yes.  Can I be less than polite when he escorted me home from the
meet--in the dusk, too?'

'And who the deuce is Bob Hoyle?'

'I have mentioned him to Hester,' replied Annot, still evasively.

'But who is he visiting in this locality?'

'I do not know.'

'Not know--how?'

'Simply because I never asked him.'

'Strange!'

'Not at all, Roland dear, when I think and care so little about him.'

She tried a tiny caress, but he turned from her, embittered and
humiliated.

Disappointment, shame, sorrow, and mortification were all gathering
in his heart, as doubts of Annot grew there too; and in his then weak
and nervous state he actually trembled to pursue a subject so
obnoxious.  Was it to be the old story;

  'Of one that loved, not wisely, but too well;
  Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought,
  Perplexed in the extreme.'


A little silence ensued, during which, as he looked upon her in all
her fair beauty, so unstable of purpose, and so humble in heart is
one who loves truly that he felt inclined to throw himself upon her
affection for him, and only beseech her to be careful.

She was--he thought--young, artless, rash, and perhaps knew not how
unseemly, especially in a censorious country place, were these
mistakes of hers.  But her manner repelled him.  The half-grown
sensation of softness died away, and irritation came instead.  So he
said bluntly:

'Annot, I tell you plainly that there must be no more of this sort of
thing.'

Her usually sweet little lips curled defiantly, and she eyed him
inquiringly now.

'Dare you try to make me believe that what you admit is all that has
occurred?'

'I do not wish to try and make you believe anything,' she replied
sullenly, yet in a broken tone.

'This is worse and worse,' said Roland in a husky voice.

'Are you jealous of him?' she asked, with a laugh that had no mirth
in it.  'Surely not; he is but a boy.'

'I am, and shall be, jealous of no one, Annot!'

'He speaks to me; it is not my fault--and is always polite.  Do not
let us squabble, dearest Roland--I do so hate squabbling,' said she,
selecting a white bud from among the flowers at her waist and pinning
it in his hole; but Roland's blood was too much up to be propitiated
by a white bud, so Annot had recourse to a few tears; but, so far
from there being peace between them, matters waxed more unpleasant
still.

'Why has this Mr.--ah--Hoyle--as you name him, never called here, nor
left even a card?'

'I cannot tell.'

Yet he is an old London friend, and has come almost to the house
door!'

'I cannot tell,' repeated Annot.

'Ycu have met him on the skirts of the park?'

'By the merest chance.'

'These chances would seem to have occurred too often,' interrupted
Roland, greatly ruffled now, yet feeling sick at heart; 'so let us
come to an end!'

'By--by parting?' she asked, with pale lips.

'It is easily done; I am going back to the regiment in a little time,
and gossips will soon cease to link my name with yours, when you----'

'How cruel of you, Roland!' she said, and she looked at him
entreatingly for a moment with her small hands clasped, and then
turned away her face.

'It may be merely flirtation or folly that inspires you; but beware,
Annot, how you treat me thus, and remember that lovers' quarrels are
not _always_ love renewed.'

He felt and feared that a gulf which might never be bridged over was
widening suddenly between them.  Had she asked him just then, with
all his anger, to kiss her once and forgive her, he would have
yielded too probably; but the little beauty, all unlike her usually
pliant, soft, and clinging self, held haughtily aloof and said:

'Am I to give you back your ring, and relinquish all that it
involves?'

'No, Annot, no, no,' exclaimed Roland, not yet prepared for such a
climax.

With an angry sob in her slender throat she tried to twist it off,
but in vain; and they regarded each other with a curiously mingled
expression which they never forgot--he sorrowfully and indignantly;
she saucily and defiantly.

'Have you anything more unpleasant to say to me, Roland?' she asked.

'Only that I begin to wish, Annot--oh, my God--that we had never,
never met!'

'Indeed!  Good-bye.'

'Good-bye.'

She swept away.  What a change--was it witchcraft?--had come ever the
once playful, childlike, and winning little Annot!  Roland's heart
was sick and crushed, and he began to have a growing and unpleasant
suspicion that he had made, as he thought, 'a confounded fool of
himself.'

'Thank Heaven, Hester!  I shall soon have the sea rolling between me
and this place,' said he, when, after a time, he told his cousin, the
early playmate and sweetheart of other days, the story of this
interview and his complaint against Annot.  'Regrets are useless; we
cannot change the past; but I have neither the inclination nor the
capacity to face all the circumstances that seem to surround me in
Earlshaugh now.'

'Why has he addressed me in his distress, and on this subject?'
thought Hester almost angrily; 'how can I sympathize with him in the
matter?  And he comes to me at a time, too, when I know we may be
soon parted for ever, and when my thoughts are as full of him as they
were in that old time that can return no more.'

Piqued at and disappointed with Annot, a curious and confusing
emotion came more than once into the mind of Roland--one described by
a Scottish writer as feeling 'that had he not, and had he been, and
if he could he might--in line, he thought the medley which many a man
thinks when he knows that he loves one, and only _one_; but under
suasion and pressure would find it just possible to yield to _other_
distractions.'

Annot did not afford him many opportunities of recurring to their
first quarrel or effacing its memory; and from that hour she kept
indignantly and sullenly aloof, as much as she could in courtesy do,
from Maude and Hester--to their surprise--spending most of her time
in the apartments and society of Mrs. Lindsay.

But once again, in the long shady avenue near the Weird Yett, when
Maude was idling there, under the cold blue sky of an October
evening, with Jack Elliot--idling in the happiness a girl feels when
on the brink of her marriage with the man she loves with all the
strength of her warm heart--the man whose voice and the mere touch of
whose hand gives joy--she felt that heart turn cold when she detected
Annot--her brother's _fiancée_--bidding a hasty adieu to the stranger
before referred to--clad in a red hunting coat, and leading his horse
by the bridle.

So a crisis of some kind was surely at hand now!




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE CRISIS.

What did, or what could, Annot mean by this studied duplicity and
defiance of propriety? thought Maude; but ere she could reflect much
on the subject, or consider how to speak to Roland about it, or
whether she should simply let him discover more for himself, the
crisis referred to in our last chapter came to pass, and the possible
'_other_ distractions' that had occurred, in his irritation, to
Roland's mind were forgotten by him then.

Notwithstanding what had passed between them, the charm of Annot's
manner, her graceful and piquant ways, impelled or allured him again,
and his passionate love for her swelled up at times in his breast.
Was he not to make one more effort, or was it too late to win her
love again?

Like one who when drowning will cling to a straw, Roland, with all
his just indignation at Annot, clung to his faith in her; but they
had parted with much apparent coldness; and, as we have said, in that
huge old rambling mansion of Earlshaugh, as it was easy for people to
avoid each other it they wished to do so, he had not again met her
alone.

Thus any explanation was deferred, and, with all his love, he felt
painfully that if he once began fully to doubt her and surrendered
himself to that idea, all would be lost; and yet he had little cause
for confidence now, apparently.

From her own lips again he resolved--however galling to his pride--to
hear his fate, of her wishes and of her love, if the latter still was
his; and thus he asked her by note to meet him in the library, at a
time when they were sure to be undisturbed, as Mrs. Lindsay was
usually indisposed at the hour he selected, and Maude, Jack, and
Hester would be, he knew, absent riding.

From his own lips Annot had been fully informed of how his father's
will was framed, but her ambition went far beyond that of Becky Sharp
when the latter thought she would be a good woman on five thousand a
year, would not miss a little soup for the poor out of that sum, and
could pay everybody when she had it.

Annot, though apparently passive no longer, feigned a desire to
continue 'the entanglement,' for such she deemed it--this engagement
to Roland, begun at Merlwood.  She had a secret gratitude for the
information that had come to her in time of his future prospects.
She could have continued to love him after a fashion of her own, and
perhaps as much as it was in her selfish nature to love anyone; but
it must be as proprietor of Earlshaugh, of which she had an
overweening desire to be mistress, and, moreover, she never meant to
form or face 'a moneyless marriage.'

And now in this meeting with Roland she felt that a crisis in her
fate had come; that the sooner it was over and done with the better;
and with a power of will beyond what anyone could have conceived a
girl so soft and fair, so small in stature and lovely in feature
might possess, she kept her appointment; but, without referring even
to Lucrezia Borgia, who was a golden-haired little creature, with a
feeble and vapid expression of face (as Mrs. Jameson tells us), does
not history record how often fair little women have been possessed of
iron will and nature?

Annot accorded her soft cheek to Roland's lip so coldly that he
scarcely touched it!

Both looked pale, though they stood, when regarding each other, in
the red light of the October sunset, that streamed like a crimson
flood through a deeply embayed old window near them.

Annot wore a dark dress, and round her slender throat a high ruffle
of black lace, which, like the jet drops in her tiny ears, enhanced
the marvellous fairness of her skin, as Roland remarked, for even
such trifling details failed to escape him in that time of doubt and
exceeding misery.

'You have not kept me waiting,' said she with a smile, and as if
feeling a dire necessity for saying something.

'Was it likely I should do so, Annot, when I have counted every
moment of time since I sent my little note to you?' replied Roland,
feeling instinctively from what he saw in her eye and manner that the
dreaded time had come!

'How silly--useless I mean, such impatience, when we meet daily
somewhere--at meals and so forth!' said she, looking out upon the far
expanse of green park, steeped in the hazy sunshine of one of the hot
evenings of October.

'Annot,' said Roland impatiently, and striking a heel on the floor as
he spoke, 'after what passed between us last--a conversation alike
distasteful and painful--I can no longer endure the suspense, the
agony your conduct and bearing cause me.  Do you really wish all to
be at end between us?'

His eyes were bent eagerly upon her face, the muscles of which
certainly quivered with emotion--either love or shame, he knew not
which--and he took her hands in his, but relinquished them; his own
were hot and trembling as if he had an ague, white hers were firm and
cold as they were white and beautiful.

'It was a joke--a petulant joke, your proposal to give me back your
ring and break our engagement--was it not, darling?' he asked after a
brief pause.

'It was _no_ joke,' replied Annot, with still averted eyes, in which,
however, there was not a vestige of those sympathetic tears, which,
fur effect, she had usually so near the surface on trivial occasions;
'it cost me much to utter the few words I said--but I meant them.'

'You did?'

'Yes--Roland.'

'And that was to be your only reply to my remonstrances?'

'Made as these remonstrances were--yes.  You are too exacting,
Roland; and--and--' she added with a bluntness that jarred on his
ear, 'it is so tiresome being long engaged, mamma says.'

'I am sorry you quote her; but we can end it without an unseemly
quarrel, surely.'

She shook her head, and all her hair shone like a golden aureole in
the sunlight; and with all his just anger Roland looked at her as if
his mind were leaving him.

'In short, mamma also says----'

'Mamma again!--says what?'

'That we are evidently unsuited for each other.'

'When did she discover this?  Her letters to me have never breathed a
suspicion of it.'

Annot did not reply, but continued to trace the pattern of the carpet
with a foot like that of Cinderella.

'When did she adopt this new view?' asked Roland, almost sternly.

'Recently, I suppose.'

'We know our own minds, surely, so what can her capricious ideas
matter to us?  If you love me, Annot, they can make no difference.'

She only winced a little, and averted her face still more, as if she
dared not meet his dark, earnest, and inquiring eyes.

'Speak!' he exclaimed.

'Women change their minds often, it is said--why may not I, by
advice?'

'God keep me, Annot!  Then the change is with yourself?  Has our
past, so far as you are concerned, been all duplicity and falsehood?'

'As when last we spoke on this matter, your language is unpleasant,
Roland,' said Annot, as if seeking a cause for indignation or
complaint.

'Is this a time to mince matters?  Surely you loved me?'

'You--you were so fond of me, that I could not help liking you in
return, Roland,' said she, trembling and confusedly; 'we were thrown
so much together, and--and you see----'

'That I have been befooled!' he interrupted her with bitterness and a
gust of anger.

'Do not use such a rough expression,' said she, recovering herself;
'and please don't allow listeners to think we are rehearsing for
amateur theatricals.'

For a moment concentrated fury flashed in Roland's dark eyes.

Then he regarded her wistfully again, and his gust of anger gave way
to an emotion of infinite tenderness.

'Annot,' he exclaimed, caressing her hands, on which, truth to tell,
his hot tears dropped.  'Oh, my darling, tell me that you do not mean
all this--that you are not in cruel earnest and oblivious of all the
past.'

'I never loved you----'

'Never loved me?' said he hoarsely,

'As you wished to be; it was to serve my own ends--my own purpose
that I simulated--then--so hate me if you can!'

'Hate you,' he faltered, utterly crushed and bewildered by her words.
His eyes were lurid now, for anger again mingled with love in them.
'Surely this is all some bad dream, from which I must awaken.'

'It is no dream,' said Annot, turning with an unsteady step as if she
would pass him; but he barred her way.

'Do you mean that you loved some one else?' he asked.

'Do not ask me.'

'I have the right to do so!'

'No, Roland--you have not.'

'You surely did at one time love me, Annot, or your duplicity is
monstrous, till--till this fellow Hoyle came upon the tapis?  Was it
not so?' he asked, almost piteously, for his moods varied quickly.

'Not quite; and I can't be poor, that is the plain English of it; I
can't be a struggling man's wife, as I now know yours must be, as
Earlshaugh----'

'Belongs to another, and not to me, you mean?'

She was silent.  Selfish though she was to the heart's core, a blush
crossed her cheek, a genuine blush of shame at her own blunt
openness, and it was but too evident that she had schooled herself
for all this--had screwed her courage to the sticking point.

'Then I have only been a cat's-paw, and you have loved, if it is in
your nature to love, another all the time?' said Roland hoarsely, as
he drew back a pace with something of horror and disgust in his face
now.

Almost pitifully did this cruel girl regard his face, which had
become ashy gray, the wounded and despairing love he felt for her
passing away from his eyes, while his figure, she could not but
admit, was straight, handsome, and proud in bearing as ever, when
compared with that of the _other_, who was in her mind now.

'All is over, then, and there is no need to torture or humiliate me
further,' said he.

'All is over--yes,' she replied, with a real or affected sob; 'and
you will, I hope, bless the day when I left you free to win a richer
bride than I am, Roland.  Forgive me, and let us part friends.'

'_Friends!_' he exclaimed, in a low voice of reproach, bitterness,
and rage curiously mingled.

Resolute to act out the scene to the last detail, she slowly drew her
engagement ring off her finger--like the marriage ring, the woman's
badge of servitude according to the old English idea, but of eternity
with every other people, past or present--laid it on a table near
him, and gliding away without another word or glance, they separated,
and Roland stood for a minute or so as if turned to stone.

Then, like one in a dream, he found himself walking slowly to and
fro, forgetful even of his temporary lameness, on the terraced path
beneath the towering walls of the old house.

The engagement ring--how tiny it looked!--was in his hand, and with
something like a malediction he tossed it into a sheet of deep
ornamental water that lay thereby, and there too, perhaps, he would
have tossed all the other beautiful and valuable presents he had
given her; but these the fair Annot did not as yet see her way to
returning, and, sooth to say, he never thought of them.

So--so he was 'thrown over' for one who seemed most suddenly and
unaccountably to have come upon the tapis, but chiefly because he was
a kind of outcast--a disinherited man.  Had she not told him so in
the plainest language?

The situation was a grotesquely humiliating one.

'Oh, to be well and strong and fit to march again!' he sighed.

In the expression of his dark eyes there was now much of the
bitterness, keenness, and longing of a prisoner looking round the
cell which he loathed, and from which he desired to be gone; and more
than once, in the solitude of his room, he closed his eyes and rested
his head upon his arms, as if he wished to see and hear of his then
surroundings no more.

Even the caresses of Maude--even Hester's gentle voice and soft touch
failed to rouse him for a time.

Some days elapsed before Roland--after thinking over again and again
all the details of this most singular episode, the strangest _crisis_
in his life--could realize that it was not all a dream, and that the
relations between himself and Annot had undergone such a complete
revolution that their paths in life must lie apart for ever, now.

But he was yet to learn the more bitter sequel to all this.

Roland naturally thought that as the doctors would scarcely yet
permit him to quit Earlshaugh and travel, now Annot Drummond would
take her departure to Merlwood or London; but this she did not do,
and seemed, with intense bad taste, to adopt the rôle of being his
stepmother's guest, while sedulously avoiding him, so he began to
make his arrangements for decamping without delay.

In bidding adieu, out of mere courtesy to Mrs. Lindsay, Roland never
referred to the existence of Annot.  Neither did she.

Was this good feeling, or was she endorsing the new situation adopted
by Annot?

He cared not to canvass the matter even in his own mind; but ere he
quitted Earlshaugh he was yet, we have said, to learn the sequel to
all this.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

TURNING THE TABLES.

His sword and helmet cases, his portmanteau and travelling rugs were
duly strapped and placed in the stately old entrance-hall in
readiness, as Roland was to be off by an early morning train, and
never again would he break bread in the home of his forefathers.
Every link that bound him to Earlshaugh was broken now, and he felt
only a feverish restlessness to be gone!

Ere that came to pass, Roland's eyes were fated to be somewhat
roughly opened.

All that day the nervous quivering of his nether lip, his unusual
paleness--notwithstanding his apparent calm--showed to his sister
that he was deeply agitated, and was suffering from passionate, if
suppressed, emotion.

In the deepening dusk of his last evening at Earlshaugh he had, cigar
in mouth, strolled forth alone to con over his own bitter thoughts,
and nurse his wrath 'to keep it warm,' or inspired by a vague idea
that he would sort his mind, which was then in a somewhat chaotic
condition.

The evening--one of the last in October--was cool, and the wind
wailed sadly in the task of stripping the trees of their withered
leaves, though at no time of the year do they look so beautiful in
the Scottish woods as in autumn, save, perhaps, when they first burst
forth in their emerald greenery.

Round the tall old mansion, down the terraced walks, past the lakelet
and through the grounds he wandered till he reached a kind of kiosk
or summer-house, built of fantastic, knotty branches, roofed with
thatch, and furnished with a rustic seat--a damp and gloomy place
just then.  He threw himself upon the latter, and, resting his head
upon his hand, proceeded to chew the cud of bitter fancy that had no
sweet in it.

The period had vanished when existence seemed full of joyous dreams
and a course of glowing scenes.  The world was still as beautiful, no
doubt, but it sparkled no more with light and colour for him; idols
had been shattered--ideals had collapsed, and it seemed very cold and
empty now.

How long he had been there he scarcely knew--perhaps half an
hour--when in the gloom under the half-stripped trees he heard
voices, and saw two figures, or made out a male and female lingering
near the summer-house, which he dreaded lest they should enter, when
he discovered them to be Annot--Annot Drummond, muffled in a cosy
white fur cloak of Maude's--and, Heaven above!--of all men on
earth--Hawkey Sharpe!

For a moment or two Roland scarcely respired--his heart seemed to
stand still.  Intensely repugnant to him as it was to act as
eavesdropper on the one hand, on the other he was proudly and
profoundly reluctant to confront those two.  There he remained still,
hoping every moment they would move on and leave the pathway clear;
but they remained, and thus he heard more than he expected to hear
from such a singular pair.

He had now a clue to the reason of Annot's reluctance to leave
Earlshaugh, of her protracted visit as the guest of Mrs. Lindsay, and
why latterly she had so mysteriously and sedulously cultivated the
friendship of that lady.

The question, was it honourable to remain where he was, flashed
across Roland's mind!  It was not incompatible with honour under the
peculiar circumstances, so he heard more.

'That nonsense has surely come to an end, or are you still engaged to
him?' said Hawkey, who held her hands in his.

Annot was silent.  Could she be temporizing yet?

'Do you think he loves you as well as I do?' urged Hawkey Sharpe,
bending over her.

Still she was silent.

'If so, why has he ever left you, even for an hour, to shoot and so
forth, as he has often done?  Speak, Annot.  Surely I may call you
Annot now.'

Still there was no reply.  It seemed as if she was thinking
deeply--thinking how best to reply, to play her cards or to
temporize; but to what end, when all was over between her and Roland
now?

'You _were_ engaged to him?' said Hawkey again, with a little
impatience of manner.

'By a chain of circumstances over which I had no control,' replied
Annot in a faltering voice; 'in his uncle's house at Merlwood I
was----'

'Was--is it ended?'

'Yes--for ever.'

'Thank God for that!  Did you think you loved him?' asked Hawkey with
a grin.

'I believe that I did--or ought--I was so silly--so simple--so----'

'There--there--I don't want to worry you.'

'But he loves me, I know that,' said Annot in a low voice--true to
her vanity still.

'That I can well believe--who could see you and not love you?' said
Hawkey gallantly.

'I could never marry a poor man,' said Annot candidly.

'Well--he is poor enough.'

'And live on, eating my heart out in struggles such as some I have
seen,' continued Annot as if to herself.

'Though here in Earlshaugh just now, what is he, this fellow Lindsay,
but a penniless pretender!' exclaimed Sharpe, fired with animosity
against Roland; who thus heard his name, his position, and the
dearest secrets of his heart openly canvassed by this presumptuous
and low-born fellow, and with Annot too--she who, till lately--but he
could not put his thoughts in words--they seemed to choke him; and
the whole situation was degrading--maddening!

'Well,' chuckled Sharpe, 'he is out of the running now; and then you
and I understand each other so well, my little golden-haired pet! so
true it is that "when a woman of the world and a man of the world
meet, whatever the circumstances may be, or the surroundings, in a
moment there is rapport between them, and all flows along easily."  I
thought when Lindsay fell into the Cleugh,' he added, with a coarse
laugh, 'that he had betaken himself off to something that suited him
better than fighting the Arabs.  But it is long ere the deil
dies--now he is well and whole again, and looks every inch like the
Lindsay in the gallery, with the buff coat and a dish-cover on his
head, that led a brigade of horse against the English at Dunbar.
Well, the old place has done with that brood now; and after Deb,
Earlshaugh must be mine--mine--shall be _ours_, Annot, for ever and
aye!'

The breeze caught the lace of her sleeve, and, lifting it, showed the
perfect and lovely contour of her soft white arm, on which Hawkey
Sharpe fastened his coarse lips with a fervour there could be no
doubting.

Kissed by him?  Roland felt perfectly cured.  The desecration, the
dishonour, seemed complete!  It is but too probable that Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe felt the exultation of revenge and triumph in every kiss he
took, even though he believed them to be unseen.

Though it was now apparent that she had thrown 'dust' in Roland's
eyes by using the name of _another_, and had thus doubly lied to him,
the blow did not fall so unexpectedly, yet the degradation of it was
complete.

Hoyle was a myth--a blind to throw him off the right track--and he
had been discarded, not for that personage, but for Hawkey Sharpe.
This was truly to find

  'In the lowest deep a lower deep'

of utter humiliation!

At last they passed onward, and he was again alone.

'I have undergone something like the torture of the rack,' said he
with a bitter laugh, when he related to Maude and Hester what he had
been compelled to overhear in the summer-house, and the latter
thought of that eventful evening at Merlwood, when she so unwittingly
had in like manner been compelled to lurk in the shrubbery and hear a
revelation that crushed her own heart to the dust.

Thus, though he knew it not, the tables were turned on Roland with a
vengeance.

Like Hester, he could not agree with Romeo--

  'How sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,'

when the said tongues addressed all their sweetness to others.

'She is an ungrateful, selfish, horrible girl--I'll never forgive
her--never!' said Maude, almost sobbing with anger.

'How filthy lucre rules the world now!' exclaimed Roland.  'Do such
girls as she ever repent the mischief they make--the hearts they have
broken?'

'As if hearts break nowadays? she would ask,' said Hester with
something of a smile.

'Likely enough--it is her style, no doubt.  But can you, Hester, or
anyone, explain this cruel duplicity?  To me it seems as if I were
still in the middle of a horrid dream--a dream from which I must
suddenly wake.  That she, so winsome and artless apparently--so
gentle and loving, should become so cold, so calculating, so
mercilessly cruel now!'

'I always mistrusted her,' said Maude bitterly.  'People call her
eyes hazel--to me they always seemed a kind of vampire-green.'

Roland made no reply, but he was thinking with Whyte-Melville:

'Who shall account for the fascination exercised by some women upon
all who approach their sphere?  The peculiar power of the
rattlesnake, whose eye is said to lure the conscious victim
unresistingly to its doom, and the attractive properties possessed by
certain bodies, and by them used with equal recklessness and cruelty,
are two arrangements of Nature which make me believe in mesmerism.'

'Well--to-morrow I quit this place without beat of drum!' exclaimed
Roland.

'For Edinburgh?'

'Yes--to the Club.'

'And then?'

'For Egypt.  There I shall live every day of my life as if there were
no to-morrow.'

'Nonsense!' said Jack.  'You'll get over all this in time--a hit in
the wing, that is all!'

Old Johnnie Buckle, who had forebodings in the matter of Roland's
departure, had tears in his eyes as he drove him in the drag to the
railway station next morning, and as he wrung his hand at parting he
said--showing that he knew precisely of the double trouble that had
fallen on the young Laird:

'Better twa skaiths than ae sorrow, Maister Roland,' meaning that
losses can be repaired, but grief may break the heart; 'and mind ye,
sir,' he added, as the train started, 'a' the keys o' the country
dinna hang at ae man's belt, and ye'll wear your ain bannet yet!'

And on this _bouleversement_ we need scarcely refer to the emotions
of those who loved Roland best.

Jack Elliot, as he selected a cigar to smoke and think the situation
over, deemed that Roland was well out of the whole affair; Maude, who
was preparing for her departure from Earlshaugh, like Hester, was
furiously indignant; but, for reasons of her own, the thoughts of the
latter were of a somewhat mingled nature.




CHAPTER XL.

THE NEW POSITION.

Though, by her own admission, not entirely ignorant of Annot's secret
springs of action, that social buccaneer, Mr. Hawkey Sharpe, was
exultantly defiant about his victory over, and revenge on, Roland
Lindsay, for such he deemed the new position to be; and in his pale
gray eyes, as he thought over it, there gleamed a savage light, such
as it is said 'men carry when the thirst for blood possesses them.'

Roland, whom latterly Mrs. Lindsay had learned to like better than
was her wont, was now gone, and would nevermore, she was assured,
repass the door of Earlshaugh, and she actually felt as much regret
for him as it was in her hard, cold nature to feel.  He had been
kind, her heart said to herself, and his soft, gentle, and polished
manners contrasted most favourably with those of the few men she met
now, and especially with those of her brother Hawkey.

'The self-contained bearing, the habitual repose of one who mixes in
good society, invariably displays,' it is said, 'a striking
dissimilarity to those who, immersed in the business of life, have
not such opportunities.  Women note these things keenly; especially
do they regard the carriage of those whom they believe to move in
circles above their own.'

With regard to Annot, as one connected by marriage with the Lindsay
family, she was not sorry at the turn affairs had taken with regard
to that enterprising young lady and her brother, Hawkey Sharpe.
Socially, Annot was far beyond, or above, the bride he could ever
have hoped to win, and she might be the means of raising him,
steadying and curing him of his horsy, low, and gambling
propensities, which had made him prove a great anxiety in many ways,
with all his usefulness to herself, since, on her husband's death,
she became mistress of Earlshaugh.

'Thanks, Deb, old girl,' said he, as he pocketed a cheque of hers for
fifty pounds, and thought gloomily over the two thousand that would
in time become inexorably due and must be paid, or see him
stigmatized as a _welsher_!

'Little does the outer world know of all I have to put up with from
you, Hawkey,' said she, with a sigh, as she locked away her
cheque-book, and he surveyed her with a cool and discriminating stare
through his eyeglass--the use of which be affected in imitation of
others--screwed into his right eye.

'It is too bad of you to talk to me in that way, Deb,' said he, 'when
I have cut out and relieved you of the presence of that impudent
beggar, Lindsay.  Miss Drummond, as an only daughter, must, I
suppose, be the heiress to something or other.'

'I thought she would never look with favour on you--but treat you as
Maude did,' said Mrs. Lindsay, slowly fanning herself with a large
black lace fan.

Hawkey laughed maliciously; then he suddenly set his teeth together
and exclaimed:

'Maude!  I'll pay _her_ out yet--she and I have not squared our
accounts--I shall be even with her before long.  As for little Annot
not looking at me--by Jove, she has looked and said all I could have
wished.  She is not so "stand-off" and unapproachable as you may
think all her set to be, when a fellow knows the way to go about
it--as I rather flatter myself I do,' he added, caressing his
straw-coloured and tenderly-fostered moustache, and pulling up his
shirt-collar.

'But where have you and she met, since you ceased to occupy your
rooms here?'

'Oh--with the hounds--in the park--wherever I wished, in fact.  You
and she, Deb, will get on excellently together, if we all play our
cards well now--I marry one of the family, don't you see?  Then, I
haven't a doubt that Annot has money.'

'Did she give you reason to suppose she has?'

'N--no--not exactly--well?'

'She will succeed to whatever her mother may have--little, probably.'

'Will have, or _may_ have--shady that!  Well, unlike most heiresses,
she's a deuced pretty little girl, Deb, and suits my book exactly.
So, with your assistance, we shall be all right.'

'My assistance?'

'Of course.'

'Bright, soft, and girlish as she seems, I suspect there is not a
more artful damsel in London,' said Mrs. Lindsay shrewdly.

'Oh bosh, Deb!  Well, if it be so, two can do the artful game; but
does not your own knowledge of human nature lead you to see,' he
added sententiously, 'that art and prudence too give place when love
comes on the scene?'

'Love--yes--are you quoting a play?  Will this fancy of hers last--if
fancy it is?'

'Why not?'

'You are not a gentleman in her sense of the word.'

'You are deuced unpleasant, Deb!' said he, contemplating his spiky
nails.

'And her sudden quarrel with Roland Lindsay--if quarrel it was--I do
not understand.'

'I do.  He is a poor beggar--dropped out of the hunt--and I--I am----'

'What?'

'Supposed to be your heir,' said he, putting the suggestion gently;
'long, long may it be only supposition, Deb; but a few thousands
yearly--say five--would make us all right, and then we have the run
of the house here--what more do we want?  So all will be right, even
with the county, I say again, if we only play our cards well.'

She had played _her_ cards well in the past time, she thought, as
Hawkey, whom conversation always made thirsty, left her in quest of a
brandy and soda.

Seated in her luxurious boudoir, her memory went back to the days of
her early life, as an underpaid and hard-worked governess; and then
to those when she became the humble and useful companion to Roland's
mother, and, after her death, a kind of guardian to Maude on the
latter leaving school.  Then came the accident that befel the old
Laird in the hunting-field at Macbeth's Stank--a wet ditch with a
'yarner' on each side, the terror of the Fife Hunt, but said to have
been leapt by the usurper's horse when he returned from Dunnimarle
after slaying the family of Macduff; and how necessary she made
herself to the suffering invalid; how (artfully) she seemed to
anticipate his thoughts, to understand all his wants, his favourite
dishes and so forth; and how grateful he became to her, and how she
clung to him like a barnacle or octopus, without seeming to do so.
How necessary he soon found it to have a clever, sensible, and loving
woman--one rather handsome, too--to look after him, when his two
sons--especially that spendthrift in the Scots Guards--seemed to
regard him as only a factor or banker to draw upon without mercy; and
so he married her one morning when the weather was very cold; when
the early snow was on the Ochil summits and powdering the Lomonds of
Fife, and _then_ she knew that she was the wife of a landed gentleman
of old and high descent--Colin Lindsay, Laird of Earlshaugh!

She was, of course, to be a second mother to Maude (who declined to
view her as such) and to his two sons if they became careful; and
meantime, ere dying, he handed over to her, by will, as stated,
beyond all hope of disputing it at law, every wood, acre, and tree he
possessed, causing much uplifting of hands and shaking of heads in
ominous wonder throughout the county, and more especially in the East
Neuk thereof.

But she bore herself well, dressed richly as became her age and new
station--kept a handsome carriage with her late husband's arms--the
fesse chequy argent and azure for Lindsay--thereon in a lozenge; but
was rarely seen in the company of Maude, who did not, would not, and
never could, approve of the position so ungenerously assigned to
herself and her only surviving brother Roland, who had been much less
to blame than his senior of the Household Brigade.

And Mrs. Lindsay was just then beginning to discover that she was
likely to have--in the person of her brother, as an intrusive, if
sometimes necessary factotum--something of a skeleton in her cupboard
at Earlshaugh.

Since the Laird's death, Hawkey Sharpe had loved well to pose as a
man of influence and importance--more than all, as the probable and
future proprietor of Earlshaugh; and liked to imagine how all would
look up to him then and seek his favourable notice.

His sister's secret and deadly ailment was to him a constant source
of anxiety that was _not_ borne of affection; he dreaded, also, her
'kirk proclivities,' and the influence possessed over her 'by that
old caterpillar, the minister.' 'I'll have to look sharp now after my
own interests--old Deb is getting rather long in the tooth for me,'
he would think at times.

Treated as she had been by Maude and others of the family since her
marriage, she could not have a very kindly feeling to the Lindsay
line.  'Blood is warmer than water,' says our Scottish proverb; and
Hawkey was the only kinsman she had in the world that she knew of;
but, a scapegrace, a spendthrift, and toady to herself, as she knew
him to be, some of her sympathies were just then rather more with the
disinherited Roland Lindsay than Mr. Hawkey Sharpe would have
relished, had he in the least suspected such a thing.

And Annot's thoughts on reviewing her new position were rather of a
mingled sort, and something of this kind:

'I am going to marry this man Hawkey Sharpe.  Odious man!  I cannot
pretend, even to myself, to be much in love with him--if at all; yet
I am going to marry him--and why?  Because I love the splendid
patrimony that, in time, will become his; this beautiful estate, this
grand old house, the parure of family diamonds, and the settlements
that must be made upon me.  I always meant to marry the first wealthy
man who asked me, and now I am only true to my creed--the creed mamma
taught me.  Can anyone blame me for that?  Of course I would rather a
thousand times have had poor Roland with Earlshaugh, because he is a
man that any woman might love and be proud of; but failing him, I
must put up with the person and name of--Hawkey Sharpe.  Can anyone
think it very wicked that I--a penniless little creature--should
prefer such a well-feathered nest as this to that gloomy and small
poky house in South Belgravia, with its one drab of a servant, cold
meat, shabby clothes, and all its sordid concomitants?  No; give me
the ease, the prosperity, the luxury, and the flesh-pots of
Earlshaugh, with its manor and lands, wood, hill, and field.'

But it was a considerable relief to her mind--shamelessly selfish
though she was--when within twenty-four hours after Roland's
departure her two cousins and Jack Elliot (whose faces she cared
never to see again) also left for the capital, and she remained
behind the guest of--Mrs. Lindsay.

'As for Roland,' Annot thought, '_he_ will get over our little affair
easily.  He loved me, no doubt, but love we know to be only a
parenthesis in the lives of most men.'




CHAPTER XLI.

THE CAPTIVE.

We must now change the scene to the Soudan--_Beled-es-Soudan_, or
'The Land of the Blacks,' so called by ancient geographers--whither a
single flight of imagination will take us without undergoing a
fortnight's voyage by sea to Alexandria, _viâ_ the Bay of Biscay,
with its long, heavy swells, and the Mediterranean, which is not
always like a mill pond; and then a long and toilsome route across
the Lower and Upper Provinces to where the Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil
was journeying towards his remote home, with the luckless Malcolm
Skene in his train--a place on the borders of the Nubian Desert, not
far from the Nile, in the neighbourhood of the third cataract, and
situated about midway between Assouan, the name of which had not, as
yet, become a 'household word' with us, and Khartoum, where then the
well-nigh despairing Gordon was still waging his desperate defence
against the Mahdi.

By this time how weary had the eye--yea, the very soul--of the
luckless captive become of the desert scenery, in a land visited only
by a few bold travellers, who in times past had accompanied the
caravans from one valley to another.  There the desert sand is deep
and loose, with sharp flinty stones, in some places sprinkled with
glistening rock salt, and showing here and there a grove of dwindled
acacias or tufts of colocynth and senna, to relieve the awful
dreariness of its aspect.

The water in the pools, even in the rainy season, is there black and
putrid; hence the Arabs of the district remove with their flocks to
better regions, where the higher mountains run from Assouan to
Haimaur.

Steering, as it were, unerringly by landmarks known to themselves
alone, the Sheikh Moussa Abu Hazil and his followers made progress
towards his home--or zereba--in the quarter we have mentioned.

Malcolm Skene had now been conveyed so far inland by his captors that
escape seemed hopeless; yet, buoyed up by the secret chance that such
_might_ come, he struggled on with the party day by day, ignorant of
the fate that awaited him, though he could never forget that of
Palmer and his companions on the shore of the Red Sea.

More than once Hassan Abdullah mockingly held before him the pocket
compass, which, of course, he had contrived to abstract on some
occasion.  Its loss did not matter much now, but it was eventually
appropriated by the Sheikh Moussa, whether it were _efrit_ or not;
and Hassan, who seemed inclined to resent this, received in reward a
blow from their leader's lance.

The latter, who, in some respects, was not unlike the published
portraits of his kinsman Zebehr, was at the head of a body of
Bedouins, not Soudanese.  Each tribe of these wild horsemen is
considered to have an exclusive property in a district proportioned
to the strength and importance of the tribes, but affording room for
migration, which is indispensable among a people whose subsistence is
derived from cattle, and the spontaneous produce of the sterile
regions they inhabit.  Thus they often join neighbouring tribes,
Emirs and Sheikhs, in the hope of an advantageous change.  In this
manner were this Bedouin troop under the banner of Sheikh Moussa.

All were thin and hardy men, with the muscles of their limbs more
strongly developed than the rest of the body; their strength and
activity were great, and their power of abstinence such that, like
their own camels, they could travel four or five days without tasting
water.  Their deep black eyes glared with an intensity never seen in
Northern regions, and gave full credence to the marvellous stories
Skene had heard of their extraordinary powers of discriminating
vision and the acuteness of their other senses.

Unlike the nearly nude warriors of the Mahdi, these Bedouins under
their floating burnous wore shirts of coarse cotton with wide and
loose sleeves--a garment rarely changed or washed.  Over this some
had a Turkish gown of mingled cotton and silk, but most of them wore
a mantle, called an _abba_, like a square, loose sack, with slits for
the arms, woven of woollen thread and camel's hair, girt by a girdle,
and showing broad stripes of many colours; but trousers of all kinds
seemed superfluities unknown.  Picturesque looking fellows they were,
and reminded Skene of the descriptive lines in Grant's 'Arabia':

      'Freedom's fierce unconquered child,
  The Bedouin robber, nursling of the wild,
  With whirlwind speed he guides his vagrant band,
  Fire-eyed and tawny as their subject sand:
  On foam-flecked steeds, impetuous all advance,
  Whirl the bright sabre, couch the quivering lance,
  Or grasping, ruthless, in the savage chase,
  The belt-slung carbine and spike-headed mace,
  Ardent for plunder, emulate the wind,
  Scorn the low level, spurn the world behind;
  While the dense dust-cloud rears its giant form,
  And, rolled in spires, revealed the threatening storm.'


Malcolm Skene found that he was rather a favourite with these wild
fellows from the facility with which he could converse with them in
Arabic; and though he knew not the _thousand_ names that language is
said to possess for a sword, he could repeat to them the _Fatihat_,
or short opening chapter of the Koran, called that of prayer and
thanksgiving; and they accorded him great praise accordingly.  And,
sooth to say, any Christian may repeat it without evil, as it simply
runs thus in English:

'Praise be to God, the Lord of all creatures; the Most Merciful; the
King of the Day of Judgment!  Thee do we worship, and of Thee do we
beg assistance.  Direct us in the right way of those to whom Thou
hast been gracious; not of those against whom Thou art incensed, nor
of those who go astray.'

But he knew the hostility of the slimy and savage Greek, Pietro
Girolamo, and of the cowardly and false Egyptian, Hassan Abdullah,
was undying towards him, and that they only waited for the
opportunity to take his life, if possible unknown to the Sheikh, and
then achieve their own escape from the latter.

On every occasion that suited they reviled him, spat on him, and
hurled pebbles at him; but if their hands wandered instinctively to
pistol or poniard he had but to utter the magic words to the Sheikh
Moussa, 'Ana dakheilak!' (I am your protected), and the lowering of
the lance-head in threat sufficed to send them cowed to the rear.

Moussa now made Skene acquainted with a fact which, though
explanatory as to the reason why his life was spared, did not prove
very soothing or hopeful; that he meant to retain him at his zereba
as a hostage for his kinsman Zebehr Pasha, 'then under detention at
Cairo by those sons of dogs the English--_Allah bou rou Gehenna_!'

Hence, as yet, Malcolm knew that his life was deemed of some value to
his captors, who did not then foresee the future deportation of the
king of the slave dealers, by Lord Wolseley's orders, to Gibraltar.

To escape, on foot or horseback, or in any way elude the Bedouin
guard, seemed to him a greater difficulty than to achieve the same
thing from Soudanese, so well were the former mounted, so amply
armed, so fleet and active in movement, and every way so acute,
eagle-eyed, serpent-like in wile and wisdom and relentless as a tiger
in fury and bloodshed.

Even if he could successfully elude them, what lay before him--what
behind, the way he must pursue, if ever again he was to reach the
world he had been reft from!  The desert--the awful, trackless desert
he had traversed in their obnoxious company, but could never hope to
traverse it alone--the desert, where water is more precious to the
traveller than would be the famous Emerald Mountain of Nubia itself!
It barred him out from civilization as completely as if it had been
the waves of a shoreless sea.

The Sheikh often rode by his side, and asked him many perplexing
questions about Europe and the land of the French, of which the
inquirer had not the most vague idea, or of how the red soldiers Of
the mysterious Queen reached Egypt, or where they came from; of
Stamboul, which he thought was in Arabia; of India, which he thought
was in Russia--of who were the English, and who the British that
always aided them; adding, as he stroked his great beard, that 'it
mattered little, as they must all perish--_Feh sebil Allah_!' (for
the cause of God).

He hated them with a bitterness beyond all language, as interferers
with the traffic in _djellabs_, as the slave-dealers term their human
wares; and for the losses he had sustained at their hands, like Osman
Digna, when some of his dhows were captured on their voyage to Jeddah
by British cruisers; and ultimately even Suakim became so closely
watched by the latter that his caravan leaders had to deposit their
captives by twos and threes at lonely places on the shore of the Red
Sea, to transmit them across it when occasion served.  Then when he
came to speak of the Anglo-Egyptian slave convention, which was the
ruin of the traders in human flesh, he gnashed his teeth, his black
eye-balls shot fire, and he looked as if with difficulty he
restrained himself from pinning Skene to the sand with his lance.

It was the ruin of the Soudan, he declared, as the Christians only
wished to liberate all slaves that they might become their property.
He had struggled against this, he said, with voice and sword till the
summer of 1881, when the Mahdi, Mahommed Achmet Shemseddin, issuing
from his cave on the White Nile, proclaimed himself the New Prophet.
Then he cast his lot with the latter, and in two years after served
with him at the capture of El Obeid, and the slaughter of the armies
of Hicks and Baker, when they won together a holy influence and a
military reputation, which were greatly enhanced by subsequent
conflicts and events.

Such was the stern, unpleasant, and uncompromising individual in
whose hands Malcolm Skene found himself retained as a hostage, in a
trifling way it seemed, for Zebehr-Rahama-Gymme-Abel, better known as
Zebehr Pasha, whilom the friend of General Gordon, but in reality the
most slippery, savage, and bitter enemy of Britain in the present
time.

And full of the heavy thoughts his entire circumstances forced upon
him, somewhere about the first of November he found himself, with his
escort, approaching a zereba which had been one of the headquarters
of Zebehr, but latterly assigned to his kinsman, Sheikh Moussa, and
the very aspect of it made even the stout heart of Malcolm Skene sink
within him, as he had been prepared for a tented camp, or wigwam-like
village, but not for the place in which he found himself, and which
was one of those described by Dr. Schweinfurth, the great German
traveller, when he visited Zebehr Pasha a short time before.




CHAPTER XLII.

THE ZEREBA OF SHEIKH MOUSSA.

At some little distance from the Nile, but what distance, whether one
or ten _shoni_, Skene could not then discover, stood the zereba to
which the Sheikh had lately fallen possessor after Zebehr (who had
been lord of thirty exactly similar), in a strip of green, where a
few palms, lupins, and beans grew in an amphitheatre of small
mountains--rocky, jagged, volcanic in outline and aspect.  A few
camels and donkeys grazed spectral-like in the vicinity amid a
silence that was intense, and in a district where there were no
flights of birds as in Egypt, and no wide reaches of valley covered
with green and golden plenty.

Through a gorge in the steep rocky mountains, whose sides were
blackened by the sun of unknown ages, and broken into fragments by
some great convulsion of nature, the zereba was entered.

It was a group of well-sized huts, enclosed by tall hedges, in the
centre of which stood the private residence of Sheikh Moussa, having
various apartments, wherein usually armed sentinels, black or
swarthy, half-nude, with glowing eyes and bright weapons--swords and
spears or Remington rifles--kept guard day and night.

Through these, as one who was to be treated, as yet, with hospitality
at least, Malcolm Skene was conducted by a couple of handsomely
attired slaves (for here the power of the Anglo-Egyptian Convention
was _nil_), who gave him coffee, sherbet, and a tchibouk, all most
welcome after the last day's toilsome march; and, throwing himself
upon a carpet and some soft skins, he strove to collect his thoughts,
to calculate the distance and the perils that lay between him and
freedom, and to think what was to be done now!

Meanwhile the Bedouins were grooming their horses outside, laughing,
chatting, smoking, and drinking long draughts of _bouza_ from stone
jars--a kind of Nubian beer made from dhurra.

'People always meet again,' said Pietro Girolamo with a savage grin,
showing all his sharp, white teeth beneath a long and coal-black
moustache.  'The world is round, you know, Signor, though the Sheikh
thinks it flat--flat as my roulette-table at Cairo.  Ah, Christi! we
have not forgotten that; sooner or later people always meet again,
and so shall we.'

And with these words, which contained a menace, the Greek withdrew to
some other part of the zereba, where he seemed to be somewhat at
home, as he was--Skene afterwards discovered--father of the third and
favourite wife of Sheikh Moussa.

The chambers, or halls--for such they were--seemed silent--save a
strange growling and the rasping of iron fetters--and empty now,
though there sometimes, in the palmy days of the slave trade, as many
as two thousand dealers in _djellabs_ gathered with their chained and
wretched victims every year.

'The regal aspect of these halls of State,' says Dr. Schweinfurth,
'was increased by the introduction of some lions, secured, as may be
supposed, by sufficiently strong and massive chains.'

It was the rattle of the latter and the growling of the lions that
Malcolm Skene heard with more bewilderment than curiosity on the
subject.

Here in his favourite abode, Zebehr, says the doctor, was long 'a
picturesque figure, tall, spare, excitable, with lions guarding his
outer chamber, and his court filled with armed slaves--smart,
dapper-looking fellows, supple as antelopes, fierce, unsparing, and
the terror of Central Africa; while around him gathered in thousands
infernal raiders, whose razzias have depopulated vast territories.
Superstitious, too, was Zebehr, for in his campaign against Darfour,
he melted down two hundred and fifty thousand dollars into
bullets--for no charm can stay a silver bullet--and cruel as death
itself!  A word from him here raised the Soudan in revolt against
Gordon in 1878; and it was only after some fierce righting that Gessi
Pasha succeeded in breaking the back of the revolt.  After hunting
the slave raiders like wild beasts, he captured and shot eleven of
their chiefs, including Suleiman, the son of Zebehr.  Hence the
blood-feud between Gordon and Zebehr which led the latter to refuse
to accompany the former to Khartoum.  The slave-dealers were slain in
hundreds by natives whom they had plundered.  Zebehr's letters were
found, proving that he had ordered the revolt; but no action was
taken against him, and he continued to live in luxurious detention at
Cairo.'

When Baker Pasha was organizing his forces to relieve Tokar, he asked
that Zebehr might go with him at the head of a Nubian division.
Zebehr and Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil raised the blacks, but the
Anti-Slavery Society protested against the employment of the former
as improper and in the highest degree perilous.  Sir Evelyn Baring
pleaded for Zebehr and Moussa, but Lord Granville was inexorable.  He
wrote: 'The employment of Zebehr Pasha appears to her Majesty's
Government inexpedient both politically and as regards the slave
trade.'

Thus far some of the history of yesterday, which, nevertheless, may
be new to the reader.

On his first entering the zereba Skene had returned the formal
welcome or greeting of Sheikh Moussa--touching his forehead, lips,
and breast--a symbolic action signifying that in thought, word, and
heart he was his.

Pietro Girolamo, the Greek Islesman from Cerigo, was--we have
said--the father-in-law (at least one of them) to Moussa Abu Hagil.

Malcolm Skene came to the knowledge of that connection through a
stray copy of the now pretty well-known Arabic newspaper, the
_Mubashir_, which he found in the zereba; and the columns of which
contained a memoir of that enterprising Sheikh, and in retailing some
startling incidents in his life gave a little light on certain habits
of the dwellers in the desert.

Girolamo had been the skipper of one of his slave dhows, or armed
brigs, in the Red Sea, during the palmy times, when as many as five
thousand head of slaves were exposed annually in the market place of
Shendy--a traffic in which Moussa, like his kinsmen, Zebehr Pasha,
had grown enormously rich; and, for a suitable sum, he bought a
daughter of Girolamo, a beautiful Greek girl.  She became his third
wife, and died in giving birth to a daughter, the inheritor of her
pale and picturesque beauty, though shaded somewhat by the Arab
mixture in her blood; but in her fourteenth year--a ripe age in those
regions of the sun--her charms were said to surpass all that had seen
before and had become the exaggerated theme of story-tellers and
song-makers, even in the market places and the cafés of Damanhour and
Cairo.

The girl was named Isha (or Elizabeth) after her mother, and educated
in such accomplishments as were deemed necessary to the wife of a
powerful and wealthy Emir, for such Moussa destined her to be, if not
perhaps of his friend and leader the Mahdi Achmet when the time came;
but the old brigand--for the slave dealer was little better in spirit
or habit when not absent fighting, plundering, and raiding in search
of _djellabs_--seemed never happy save when in the society of this
daughter, his only one, his other children being sons, four of whom
had fallen in battle against Hicks on the field of Kashgate.

Notwithstanding all the care with which the women of the East are
secluded in the _Kah'ah_, or harem, Isha had a lover, a young Bedouin
warrior named Khasim Jelalodeen, who, though he had no more hope of
winning her to share his humble black tent than of obtaining the
moon, loved her with all the wild passion of which his lawless Arab
nature was capable.

To have whispered of this passion to the Sheikh Moussa, whom we have
described as resembling a mummy of the Pharaohs' time resuscitated,
would have ensured the destruction of Khasim, who had only his sword,
his rifle, and a horse with all its trappings.

Yet Isha was not ignorant of the love the Bedouin bore her, as he had
a sister named Emineh, who was a kind of companion and attendant of
the former, and went between the lovers as carefully and subtly as
any old _Khatbeh_, or betrother in the Abdin quarter in Cairo in the
present hour--thus freely bouquets, symbolically arranged--the simple
and beautiful love-letters of Oriental life, were exchanged between
them through the kind agency of Emineh.

Sheikh Moussa loved his brilliant little daughter, but he loved money
more; and when a caravan, under an old business friend of his named
Ebn al Ajuz (or 'the son of the old woman,' obtained by his mother's
prayers in the mosque of Hassan at Cairo) passed _en route_ from
Darfour for the capital and Assiout, laden with ivory, gum, and
slaves--chiefly women and girls, the dealer, having heard of the
beauty of Isha, applied to the Skeikh, and made him an offer which,
as both were in the trade, he found himself--filial regard and
affection apart--bound to consider.

Moussa, to do him justice, had no great inclination to sell his
daughter, the light of his household, though he had remorselessly
sold the daughters of others by the thousand; yet he was curious to
know her value, as prices had gone down even before the arrival of
Gordon at Khartoum, especially when Ebn al Ajuz spoke of the sum he
was prepared to give, and that the purse-holder was no other than
that generally supposed misogynist, the Khedive himself.

He introduced the merchant to her apartments in order to show her
merits and discover the price, of which he could judge, however, by
his own business experience.

Her rooms, covered with soft carpets, having luxurious divans,
decorated ceilings, and tiled floors, with beautiful brackets
supporting finely wrought vessels, and having large windows of
lattice work, others of stained glass, representing floral objects,
bouquets, and peacocks, Arabic inscriptions and maxims written in
letters of gold and green, received no attention from the turbaned
and bearded slave-dealer, whose attention was at once arrested by
Isha, who had been clad, she knew not why, in her richest apparel,
with her eyebrows needlessly blackened and her nails reddened by
henna.

Ebn al Ajuz, whom long custom had rendered a dispassionate judge of
beauty in all its stages, from the fairest Circassian with golden
hair to the dark and full-lipped woman of Nubia, was struck with
astonishment by the many attractions of the half-Greek girl.

'Allah Kerim!' he exclaimed.  'With her face, form, and entire
appearance I have not the slightest fault to find,' he frankly
acknowledged; 'every motion, every attitude, every feature display
the most beautiful grace, symmetry, and proportion.  Allah! she
should be named Ayesha, after the perfect wife of the prophet!'

On hearing this a blush burned in the face of the girl, and she
pulled down her yashmac or veil.

The merchant pressed Moussa to name her price, as they sat over their
pipes and coffee; and so greatly did avarice exceed affection, that
Moussa, who--said the writer in the _Mubashir_--it was thought would
not have exchanged his daughter for the Emerald Mountain itself, was
so dazzled by the offer made that he agreed to sell her, and
preparations even were at once made for her departure, despite her
tears, her entreaties, and her despair.

Khasim Jelalodeen was filled with grief and consternation.  Oh for
Jinn or Efrits, the spirits born of fire, to aid him!

He had his fleet horse corned, refreshed by a bitter draught of
_bouza_ (not water), saddled, and in constant readiness for any
emergency; and in the night, well armed, with his heart on fire and
his brain in a whirl, he made his way secretly and softly to that
part of the zereba in which the _Kah'ah_, or women's apartments, were
situated--an act involving his death if caught, and caught he was by
the guards of Moussa, who were about to slay him on the spot; but
immemorial usage has established a custom in the Desert that if a
person who is in actual danger from another can in anticipation claim
his protection, or touch him barehanded, his life is saved.

He passed himself as a _Karami_, or mere robber, and as such was made
a close prisoner, destined to await the pleasure of Moussa, who had
just then a good deal to occupy his mind.

Meanwhile Emineh, having ascertained exactly where her rash, bold
brother was in durance, contrived to introduce herself there next
night with a ball of thread, and tying an end thereof to his right
wrist she withdrew, winding it carefully off as she went, till she
penetrated to the sleeping apartment of Moussa, and applying the
other end to his bosom woke him, saying in Arab fashion:

'Look on me, by the love thou bearest to God and thy own self, for
_this_ is under thy protection!'

Then the startled and angry Sheikh arose, took his sword, and
followed the clue till it guided him to where Khasim, the supposed
_Karami_, was confined, and he was compelled to declare himself the
protector of the latter.  His bonds were taken off; the thongs with
which his hair, in token of degradation, had been tied were cut with
a knife; he was entertained as a newly-arrived guest, and was then
set at liberty.

Emineh gave him his horse and arms, and he took his departure from
the vicinity of the zereba, but only to watch in the distance.

'In due time the caravan of Ebn al Ajuz came forth from the gates and
boundaries of thorny hedge, and the lynx-eyed Arab, Khasim, with his
heart beating high, watched it from the concealment of a mimosa
thicket, and knew the curtained camel litter which contained the
object of his adoration, as the flinty-hearted Moussa was seen to
ride beside it for a time.

The love of Khasim was not that of the educated, the cultivated, as
it is understood in other parts of the world--the cultivated in
music, art, and literature--but of its kind it was a pure, ardent,
and passionate one, and in its fiery nature unknown to 'the cold in
clime and cold in blood.'

He would bear her away, he thought; she would yet be his bride, won
by his spear and horse, like the bride of many an Arab song and
story; they would have a home among the fairy-like gardens of
Kordofan and beyond the mountains of Haraza.  Was he not
invulnerable?  Had he not an amulet bound to his sword-arm by the
Mahdi himself--an amulet before which even the bullets and bayonets
of the British had failed?

So the caravan with Isha wound on its way towards the Desert!

How dark the red round sun had suddenly become.  Khasim looked up to
see if it still shone, and it was setting fast, amid clouds of
crimson and gold, throwing long, long purple shadows far across the
plain, and there in its sheen the Nile was running swiftly as
ever--swift as life runs in the Desert and elsewhere!

Out of the latter arose a cloud of dust, with many a glittering point
of steel!  The caravan was suddenly attacked, its column broken and
pierced by a band of wild Kabbabish Arab horsemen, fifty in number at
least, and led by that slippery personage, the Mudir of Dongola, on
whom the British Government so grotesquely bestowed the Cross of St.
Michael and St. George--a gift ridiculed even by the _Karakush_, or
Egyptian _Punch_.

A conflict ensued; revolvers and Remington rifles were freely used;
saddles were emptied, and sabres flashed in the moonlight.  General
plunder of everything was the real object of the Mudir and his
Kabbabishes; to rescue Isha was the sole object of Khasim, who
charged in among them.

Amid the wild hurly-burly of the conflict, the shrieks of the women,
their incessant cries of _walwalah!_ the grunting of the camels, the
yells of the Arabs, and amid the dense clouds of dust and sand raised
by hoofs and feet, Khasim Jelalodeen speedily found the litter in
which the daughter of Moussa was placed, and was in the act of
drawing forth her slight figure across his saddlebow--horror-stricken
though the girl was, albeit she had seen death in more than one form
before--when the merchant, Ebn al Ajuz, exasperated to lose her after
all the treasure he had spent, shot her dead with his long brass
pistol; but ere he could draw another Khasim clove him to the chin,
through every fold of the turban, by one stroke of his long and
trenchant Arab sword, and, with a wild cry of grief and despair,
spurred his horse into the desert and was seen no more, though rumour
said he joined the banner of Osman Digna before Suakim.

So this was a brief Arab romance of the nineteenth century as acted
out in a part of the world which changes not, though all the world
seems to change elsewhere.


Most wearily passed the time of Malcolm Skene's captivity in the
zereba of Moussa Abu Hagil.  Weeks became months, and the closing
days of the year found him still there, and necessitated to be ever
watchful, for both Pietro Girolamo and Hassan Abdullah had, he knew,
sworn to kill him if an opportunity were given them; and nothing had
as yet stayed their hands but the influence of the Sheikh, who
protected him for purposes of his own.

Thus his life was in hourly peril; the bondage he endured was
maddening, and he could not perceive any end to it or escape from it
save death.  As for escape, a successful one seemed so hopeless, so
difficult to achieve, that it gradually became useless to brood over
it--without arms, a horse, money, or a guide.

He knew that he must now be deemed as one of the dead by his
regiment, by the authorities, and, more than all, by his widowed
mother and dearest friends, and have been mourned by them as such.

Rumour had said ere he left Cairo that a relieving column was to
start for Khartoum.  How that might affect his fate he knew not; it
might be too late to help him in any way, and to be _too late_ was
the order of our affairs in Egypt now.

So time passed on, and he was in darkness as to all that passed in
the outer world.

At last there came tidings which made the Sheikh Moussa eye him
darkly, dubiously, and with undisguised hostility--tidings which
Malcolm Skene heard with no small concern and alarm.

These were the close arrest of Zebehr Pacha as a traitor to the
Khedive Tewfik, and his sudden deportation from Cairo beyond the sea
to Gibraltar, by order of Lord Wolseley.

This event, thought Skene, must seal his own fate as an enforced and
most unwilling hostage now!

The golden grain, the full-eared wheat and bearded barley had been
gathered in every field and on every upland slope around his home;
the year had deepened into the last days of autumn; the woods and
orchards of ancient Dunnimarle were odorous of autumnal fruit and
dying leaves; the skies were gray by day and red and gloomy at eve.

White winter had come, and every burn and linn been frozen in its
rocky bed; the thundering blasts that swept the bosom of the Forth
had rumbled down the wide chimneys of Dunnimarle and swept leaves and
even spray against the window panes; while the aged trees in the glen
below had shrieked and moaned ominously in the icy winds till winter
passed away, and people began hopefully to speak of the coming
spring, but still a lone mother mourned for her lost son--her
handsome soldier son, ever so good, so tender, and so true to her,
now gone--could she doubt it?--to the Land of the Leal!




CHAPTER XLIII.

A MARRIAGE.

While Malcolm Skene was counting the days wearily and anxiously, and,
in common parlance, 'eating his heart out,' in that distant zereba,
near the Third Cataract of the Nile, time and events did not stand
still with some of his friends elsewhere; among these certainly were
Roland Lindsay and Hester Maule, and the latter did indeed mourn for
the hard and unknown fate of one whose love she never sought but
surely won.

Roland did not start immediately for Egypt after turning his back in
mortification and disgust on Earlshaugh, but for a brief time took up
his quarters at the United Service Club in Edinburgh with Jack
Elliot.  The speedy marriage of the latter and Maude, who had gone to
Merlwood with Hester, was then on the tapis, and fully occupied the
attention of all concerned.

It was impossible for anything like love to exist long, after the
rude shock--the terrible awakening--Roland had received; yet ever and
anon he found himself rehearsing with intense bitterness of spirit
the memory of scenes and passages between himself and
Annot--drivelling scenes he deemed them now!  How had he said to her
more than once:

'My darling--my darling!  Be true to me; the day when I cease to
believe in you will kill me--you are such a child--you know so little
of the world, sweet one!'

'So little of the world--a child!' thought he.  'What an ass I was!
I am not killed by it, and she has been false as the devil.  How came
I to say things that seemed so prophetic?'

Thus, as he thought over all the love and blind adoration he had
lavished on her, he felt only rage and sickness at his own folly.  He
saw it all now, when it was too late--too late!

What human heart has not learned the bitterness of these two bitter
words, in many ways, through life?

Yet, tantalizingly, she would come before him in dreams, and thus
recall him to the words of an old sonnet--

  'Half pleading and half petulant she stands;
  Her golden hair falls rippling on my hands;
    Her words are whispered in their old sweet tone.
  But neither word nor smile can move me now--
  There is an unseen shadow on her brow.
    I cannot love, because all trust is gone!'


It was a very awkward subject for Hester to approach, yet, seeing him
so moody, so silent and trist, when first again he came to Merlwood,
she said to him timidly and softly:

'Forget the past, Roland.  She made no real impression on your heart,
but affected your imagination only.'

And now he began to think that such was indeed the case; while to
Maude it seemed strange indeed that Annot Drummond should be at
Earlshaugh, posing as the future mistress thereof, while she and her
disinherited brother were a species of outcasts therefrom.

Earlshaugh--the old house of so many family traditions and
memories--was very dear to Maude in spite of all the dark and
mortifying hours she had lately spent under its roof.  What races and
frolics and fun had gone on there in the past time, when she, her
brothers, and Hester Maule were all happy children, in the long
corridors and ghostly old attics, under the steep roofs and pointed
turrets where the antique vanes creaked in the wind; and how greater
seemed their fun when the rain storms of winter or spring came
rattling down on the old stone slates, and they all nestled together
under the slope, with a sense of protection and power unknown in
future years--so the girl's heart clung to the old roof-tree with a
love that nothing in the future could destroy.

There was no use thinking of all these and a thousand other things,
as her home was now to be wherever that of Jack Elliot was.

Some of her regrets at times were shared by Roland, for they were a
race peculiar to--but not alone in--Scotland, these Lindsays of
Earlshaugh.

They had ever been high in pride and strong in self-will, lording it
over their neighbours in the Howe and East Neuk of Fife, in the days
when many a barbed horse was in stall, and many an armed man, 'boden
in effeir of weir,' sat at the Laird's table; proud of their ancient
pedigree and many heroic deeds, all unstained by timidity in war, and
foreign gold in time of peace--a stain few Scottish noble families
are without; proud of the broad lands that had come to them not by
labour or talent certainly, but by the undoubted right to be lords of
the soil by inheritance, when the soil was not held by a mere
sheepskin, but by the sword and knight-service to the Scottish Crown.

And now to return to more prosaic times.  We have said that there was
a chronic antagonism between Maude and her stepmother, Mrs. Lindsay;
then, when Roland hurried to quit Earlshaugh, she and Jack resolved
to get married, and married they were, quite quietly, as Roland was
in haste to be gone to Egypt, and they were to pass a brief honeymoon
ere Jack followed him--as he had inexorably to take his turn of
service there too.

Of the Earlshaugh will, and Maude's small inheritance under it, Jack
made light indeed.

'What matters it?' said he; 'I am Elliot of Braidielee, and there
will be our home-coming, when we have smashed up the Mahdi, and I can
return with honour!'

At this marriage Annot Drummond was not present--no invitation was
given to her, and Mrs. Lindsay excused herself through illness.
Maude laughed at her apology.

'Though we were grown up, and so beyond her reach in some respects,
she has been like the typical stepmother of the old fairy tales,'
said the girl, who, sunny-haired, blue-eyed, and bright, looked
wonderfully beautiful, apart from t lat strange halo which surrounds
every bride on her marriage day.

'All weddings are dull affairs, and we are well out of this
one--don't you think so?' said Annot coyly to her new lover.

'Perhaps, but ours won't be so,' replied Hawkey Sharpe with a knowing
wink.  'I expect it will be rather good fun.'

She shivered a little at his bad style.  The visits that are usually
paid and received, the letters that are usually written, the choosing
of much useless millinery, furniture, plate, and equipages, and the
being 'trotted out' for the inspection of mutual friends were all
avoided or evaded by the quiet mode in which Jack Elliot and Maude
were made one, and their nuptials a fact accomplished; but there was
no time for 'doing' Paris, Berlin, the Riviera, or Rome, as Jack was
bound for Egypt within a tantalizingly short period, so he secured a
charming little villa for his bride in the southern and perhaps most
pleasing quarter of the Modern Athens till he could return--if he
ever did return--from that land of disease and death, where so many
of our young and brave have found their last home.

Mr. Hawkey Sharpe at Earlshaugh laughed viciously when he read the
announcement of the marriage in the newspapers.  It was not a
pleasant laugh, even Annot thought, and boded ill to some one.

Maude seemed beyond his reach now, so far as he seemed concerned; but
there remained to him still hatred and revenge, as we may have to
show.




CHAPTER XLIV.

THE TROOPSHIP.

So while Jack and Maude were absent on their brief honeymoon Roland
bade adieu to Hester, his old uncle Sir Harry, and to pleasant
Merlwood ere turning his steps to the East.

As he looked on the refined face of the girl, with her long-lashed
gentle eyes, for the last time, something of the old tenderness that
Annot had clouded, warped, or won away, came into his heart again,
and he longed to take her kindly in his arms ere he went, but stifled
the desire, and simply held forth his hand when she proffered her
pale and half-averted cheek.  He dared not kiss away the quiver he
saw upon her lips.

'Good-bye, dear Hester,' said he.  'Have you not a word or two that I
may take with me--such as a dear sister might give?'

But her still quivering lips were voiceless; the forced smile on them
was gone, and the soft light of her violet-blue eyes was quenched as
if by recent tears; sweet eyes they were, dreamy and languid, their
white lids fringed by lashes long and dark.

Roland noted this with a heavy heart, and thought his gentle cousin
never looked so beautiful or attractive as then, when her little
hand, which trembled, was clasped for the last time in his, and she
withdrew to the end of the room.

'Good-bye, nephew,' said Sir Harry, propping himself on a stout
Indian cane.  'God keep you from harm, and may every good attend you;
but,' he added, his keen eyes glistening angrily through the film
that spread over them, 'does your conscience quite absolve you?'

'In what, uncle?'

'What?  Why, your conduct to my girl--your cousin Hester,' said Sir
Harry, in a low voice.

'Uncle?'

'Did you make no effort when last at Merlwood here to win her
admiration, her regard, her love?  Did you not simply play with her
heart, and deem it perhaps flirting?--hateful word!  In all her
anguish--and I have seen it--she has never had a word of reproach for
you, whatever her thoughts, poor child, may be; but please to think
another time, Roland, and not attempt your powers of fascination and
to act the lady-killer, lest you crush a heart that might be a happy
one.'

Roland felt himself grow pale as he listened wistfully, half
mournfully, to these merited but most unexpected remarks from the
abrupt old gentleman, to whom he was sincerely attached.  Knowing
their truth, an emotion of shame, with much of reproach or
compunction, gathered in his heart, and he muttered something
apologetic--that he had no longer the position or prospects he once
had--that Earlshaugh was no longer his--and felt in some haste to be
gone, though he was shocked to see that the old man appeared to be
suddenly and sorely broken down in health.  The Jhansi bullet had
worked its way out at last, but left a wound that would neither heal
nor close; and hence, perhaps, the irrepressible irritability that
led to these reproaches, some part of which reached the ear of
Hester, and covered her with the deepest confusion, and made her
welcome the moment of Roland's final departure; and then she said:

'Oh, papa, how could you speak as you did?  Roland made me no
proposal, asked me for no regard, and I gave him--no promise.  I have
known him, you are aware, all my life, and I do love him very
dearly--but as a brother--nothing more,' added poor Hester with a
very unmistakable sob in her slender throat.  'You do him
injustice--he has not wronged me; but you know well how others have
wronged him.'

But her father only resumed the amber mouthpiece of his.  hookah, and
continued to smoke in uncomfortable silence.

So Roland was gone, and apparently out of her life more than ever now.

Notwithstanding that he certainly had not treated her well at
Merlwood, Hester was for a time quietly inconsolable for his
departure, which he had taken in a mood of mind rendered so stern and
reckless by the episode of Annot, that she pitied him.

He would, she knew, court danger and wounds; seek perhaps every
chance of being killed--dying far away from friends and
kindred--dying a soldier's death without getting, perchance, even a
grave in the hot sands of the desert.

He would, she feared, rush on his fate; 'but men often make their own
fate; they are weak who are blindly guided by circumstances,' she had
read.  'It is given us to distinguish right from wrong; and if men
persist in wrong when the right is before them, then be the
consequences on their own head.'

The necklet--the gift he had given her at Merlwood--was clasped
lovingly round her throat now, and its pendant nestled in her breast.

'The future is vague!' thought Hester; 'but one thing is sure, we
shall never be as we have been--what we were to each other at one
time--he and I.  Shall we ever meet again--who can say?  The sea is
treacherous with its storms and other perils--the war is too dreadful
to think of!  We may never, never see each other more, and the last
hour he passed here may have been the last we shall have spent
together in this world.'

If he survived everything and came back again, could she be like the
Agnes of 'David Copperfield'?  She feared not.  Therein she had read
the story of a noble woman who had secretly loved a man all her
life--even as she had loved Roland, and who yet showed no sign of
sorrow when he married another woman.  Agnes was David's counseller
and friend until he was nearing middle age, and it was only when he
asked her to be his wife that she made the simple confession of her
lifelong love.

She pondered over all these things as she wandered alone by the
wooded Esk, the placid murmur of whose flow as it lapped among the
pebbles was the only sound that broke the silence of the rocky glen,
while at the same hour Roland was amid a very different scene--one of
high excitement, noise, and bustle, almost uproar.

Alongside a great jetty in Portsmouth Harbour H.M. troopships
_Bannockburn_ and _Boyne_ were taking troops and stores on board for
Alexandria, and on the poop of the former, a floating castle of 6,300
tons, Roland stood amid a group of officers, whose numbers were
augmenting every few minutes, and the interest and excitement were
increasing fast, as it was known that when the great white-hulled
trooper cleared out the Queen had sent special orders that the ship
was to keep well to the westward, that she might meet her in her own
yacht and pay farewell to the troops on board, mustering about six
hundred men of various arms of the service, and a host of staff and
other officers, including some of Roland's regiment.

A handsome fellow the latter looked in his blue braided
patrol-jacket, and white tropical helmet, with his sword clattering
by his side.

'When shall I be again in mufti?' thought he with a laugh (using that
now familiar term that came back from Egypt of old with the soldiers
of Abercrombie), and hearty greetings met him on every hand.

'Lindsay--it is!  I didn't know you were rejoining,' exclaimed a
brother officer, whose wounded arm was still in a sling.  'I thought
your leave was not up till March.'

'I have resigned more than two months of it, Wilton,' replied Roland.

'What an enthusiast, by Jove!'

'Not more than yourself, whose wound must be green yet.'

'Welcome--Roland,' cried another, a cheery young sub. with a hairless
chin like an apple; 'you are just the man we want for the work before
us.'

'That is right--jolly to see you again!' said a third.

'We missed you awfully, old fellow!' exclaimed a fourth.

Flattering were the greetings on every side as he stood amid the
circle of Hussars, Lancers, Artillery, and others, neither perhaps
the handsomest nor the tallest amid that merry and handsome group,
but looking a soldier every inch in his somewhat frayed and faded
fighting kit, which had seen service enough a short time before.

'Here comes Mostyn of ours,' said Wilton, as a very
devil-may-care-looking young fellow, in the new khakee uniform, with
a field-glass slung over his shoulder, came up.  'How goes it,
Dick?--heard you had committed matrimony.'

'Not such a fool, Wilton.'

'We heard you were rather gone with that elderly party at Dover--the
lass with all the rupees,' he added in a would-be _sotto voce_.

'On the War Office principle that an old girl makes a young widow?
No, Wilton, my boy,' said Mostyn as he lit a cigarette, 'I leave
these little lollies for such as you.  Her rupees were all moonshine,
and her _poudre de riz_ was a little too plain; but I shouldn't like
to have a wife who pays her milliner's bills out of her winnings at
Ascot.'

'Ah, Lindsay,' said an officer of another corps who had just marched
his little detachment on board, and gave Roland, familiarly, a slap
on the shoulder, 'how are you--going out again to the land of the
Pyramids?  Just keep your eye on my fellows for a minute, will you,
while I get some tiffin below--hungry as a hawk--tore through London
to reach the Anglesea Barracks to-day; had only time to get a glass
of sherry and a caviare sandwich at the Rag, then to get goggles and
gloves, etc., in Regent Street--ta-ta--will be on deck in a minute.'

The old familiar rattling society was delightful again, even with its
rather exaggerated gaiety and banter, and all about him were so
heedless, so happy, and full of the highest spirits, that it was
impossible not to feel the contagion.

The bustle, though orderly, was incredible, and the shipment of
stores of all kinds seemed endless, including ammunition, carts and
waggons, draught and battery horses, with thousands upon thousands of
rounds of Martini-Henry ball-cartridges, and innumerable rounds of
filled shells for thirteen and sixteen-pounder guns.

As senior officer of the mixed command going out, Roland certainly
found that he had work cut out for him just then, and no time for
farther regretting or thinking of the past, amid all the details
consequent on embarkation for foreign service.

The medical examinations were over elsewhere; but there were
'returns,' endless, as useless apparently, to be made up and signed
in duplicate; inspection of equipments; extra kits at sea to be seen
to, and dinner provided for the embarking soldiers, the arms racked
and two men per company told off to look after them, extra dogs on
the upper deck to be pursued, caught, and sent ashore despite the
remonstrances of owners, with the excess of baggage; chests piled
upon chests were being sent down below, with bedding, valises,
uniform cases, bullock trunks, and tubs; the knapsacks to be stowed
away over the mess-tables, sentries posted on the baggage-room and
elsewhere.

Amid all this a buzz of conversation was in progress at the break of
the poop among soldiers and their friends, some of whom had contrived
to get on board, and to one of these in which there was something
absurd he could not help listening.

'Sorr, is Tim Riley aboord?' asked a young Irish labourer, looking
anxiously and with a somewhat scared look about him.

'Who the devil is Tim Riley?' asked a petty officer in charge of the
gangway.

The Irishman slunk back and addressed a somewhat _insouciant_-looking
English recruiting sergeant, with ribbons fluttering from his cap,
and whose business then could only be to get a few stray 'grogs'
before the bell sounded for 'shore.'

'Sergeant, dear, may be you know Tim Riley who inlisted into the
sogers?'

'Tim Riley?  How do you spell his name?'

'Devil a one of me knows, but he was a boy from Dublin.'

'Oh, I knewed him well.  He's a colonel now,' replied the sergeant.

'A colonel--oh, glory be to God!  Is it Tim, whose ears I've warmed
many a time for stealing the ould man's Scotch apples?  Where is the
shilling, sergeant?'

'Now be off and make an _omadhaun_ of yourself,'said one of the 18th.
'I knew Thady Boyle; he 'listed as a captain--devil a less--in the
Royal County Down, and when he joined he was put in the black-hole by
a spalpeen of an English corporal.'

The bustle of the embarkation seemed endless, but at last the bugle
sounded, and a bell clanged for all visitors to quit the ship; the
various gangways were run ashore, the screw began to revolve, and
H.M.S. _Bannockburn_ was off.

While the air seemed to vibrate with cheers, the great white trooper,
slowly and stately in aspect, came out of the harbour between the
Blockhouse Fort and the Round Tower, and steamed abreast of the
crowded Clarence Esplanade, which was gay with people even at that
season, and there the soldiers, as they clustered like red bees on
the vessel's side and in the lower rigging, could see the troops of
jolly children with frocks and trousers tucked up paddling in the
water, so far as they dared venture, or making breakwaters and
fortifications of sand as actively as if they had to defend the
shores of old England.

Portsmouth, its spires, batteries, and ultramural line of
magnificent, but now obsolete, batteries and casemates, its masts and
shipping, was becoming shrouded in the golden haze of evening, and
the farewell greetings of the women on board the harbour craft and
those of the youthful tars of the old _St. Vincent_ had died away
astern; but cheers rose in volleys, if we may use the term, when the
_Bannockburn_ neared Cowes, where the Queen--the Queen herself--was
known to be in the _Alberta_ yacht, which had the Royal Standard
floating at her mainmast head, and every heart beat high as the
vessels neared each other, and the Queen--a small figure in
black--was seen amid a group waving her handkerchief.

Roland had only two buglers on board, but these poured forth the
Royal Anthem with right good will from their perch in the foretop,
while instead of the boatswain's shrill whistle the steam siren was
sounded.  The Royal yacht steamed round the towering trooper, which
slackened speed, and the signal fluttered out, 'You may proceed.'

Once more the hearty cheers responded to each other over the water;
again the little white handkerchief was seen to wave as the yacht led
the way down the Solent and through Spithead, that famous reach and
roadstead, the rendezvous of our fleets in time of war.

'Farewell, God speed you!' came the signal from the yacht once more,
and the _Bannockburn_ stood out to sea under the lee of the beautiful
Isle of Wight.

The boats were all finally secured; the anchors hauled close up to
the cat-heads by the cat-fall; the forecourse and maintopsail were
set to accelerate her speed, and the troop-ship stood on her voyage
down the Channel.

The high excitement of the last few hours had now completely passed
away.  On deck the half-hushed groups of soldiers in their gray
greatcoats were lingering, watching the occasional twinkling of the
shore lights, taking their last look of old England; and when night
had completely fallen, and the bugles had blown tattoo, the Mother of
Nations had faded out in the distance as the ship gave the land a
wide berth.

Weary with the unintermitting toil and bustle of the day, Roland,
after mess, betook himself with a cigar to his own little cabin; a
small substitute certainly for the luxuries of Earlshaugh, as was his
sole retinue now, for the staff there; his single soldier-servant by
this time had made his bed, arranged his toilette and sea-going kit,
and put the entire place in the most perfect order; and of old,
Roland knew well how invaluable a thorough soldier-servant is.

'What cannot he do with regulation pipe-clay?' it has been asked.
'In his hands it is omnipotent over cloth.  He can charm stains and
grease-spots thereout, even as an Indian juggler charms snakes; and
what sleight of hand he exercises over your garments generally.  The
tunic, grimed and mud-bespattered, he can switch and cane, and, when
folded away, it comes out as from a press.  Trousers baggy at the
knees as the historical parachute of old Mrs. Gamp, are manipulated
into their former shape.  Compared to the private valet, always
expensive and frequently mutinous, he is a pearl of the greatest
price.  His cost is a dole, and, thanks to the regimental guard-room,
he can always be kept within control.'

In the great cabin, which was brilliantly lighted still, Roland heard
the loud hum of many voices where the jovial fellows he had left were
lingering over their wine and talking unlimited 'shop'--discussing
everything, from Lord Wolseley's supposed plan of the Soudan campaign
to the last fashion in regimental buttons.

How he envied the jollity and lightheartedness of his
brother-officers--Dick Mostyn in particular.

Dick had not lost an inheritance nor a false love to boot, certainly;
but it was nothing to him that his pockets were well-nigh empty, his
banker's account over-drawn, and that he had debts innumerable, all
but paid by the proverbial 'a roll on the drum;' his talent for
soothing irate tailors had failed him; still his wardrobe was
faultless; he still wore priceless boots and irreproachable lavender
kids as steadily as he retained his step in the waltz and his seat in
the saddle, which would be of good service to him if he joined the
Mounted Infantry.  He could take nothing deeply to heart, and even
now, leading the van in Bacchanalian noise and jollity--a verse of
his song--it was from poor 'Tilbury Nogo,' ran through the cabin, and
just then it seemed exactly to suit Roland's frame of mind as he
lounged on a sofa with his uniform jacket unbuttoned:

  'I sigh not for woman, I want not her charms--
    The long waving tress, the melting black eye--
  For the sting of the adder still lurks in her arms,
    And falsehood is wafted in each burning sigh;
  Such pleasure is poisoned, such ecstasy vain--
  Forget her! remembrance shall fade in champagne!'




CHAPTER XLV.

THE DEATH WRESTLE.

Tidings had come, as stated, to the zereba of Sheikh Moussa of the
deportation of his kinsman Zebehr in a British ship of war as a State
prisoner to Gibraltar, and Malcolm Skene--no longer cared for as a
hostage--found himself in greater peril than before among his
unscrupulous captors.

He was conscious that his movements by day were watched more closely
than ever now, and by night he was always placed in a close prison
beyond the court wherein the lions were chained.

Other Sheikhs came and went, with their standard-bearers and
horsemen; conferences were evidently held with Moussa Abu Hagil;
Skene found himself an object of growing hostility, and suspected
'that something, he knew not what,' was in progress; that Gordon had
actually been victorious or rescued at Khartoum, or some great battle
had been lost by the Mahdi.

He could gather from his knowledge of the language, and the remarks
that were let fall unwittingly in his hearing that the zereba was to
be abandoned for a general movement on Khartoum, or for another
fortified post farther up the country--a move worse for him; and the
consequent preparations, therefore, packing tents, provisions, and
spoil, had begun.

To save further trouble, and gratify the lust of blood which forms a
part of the Oriental nature, he might be assassinated after
all--after having found protection under the roof and eaten the salt
of Moussa--killed as poor Hector MacLaine was killed after the battle
of Candahar, two or three years before this time.

The expression of Moussa's face as he regarded him occasionally now,
was neither pleasant nor reassuring; his deep set eyes, when he was
excited, glared with fire, like lights in the sockets of a skull; and
Malcolm Skene never knew when the supreme moment might come.

In the morning he had no assurance that he should see night--in the
night that he would be a live man in the morning.

Anything--death itself--were better than this keen and cruel suspense.

One evening about sunset there was a vehement beating of tom-toms,
and a body of Baggara Arabs, some on horseback, others on camels, but
many on foot--a fierce and jabbering mob, all but nude--though
well-armed with bright-bladed Solingen swords and excellent Remington
rifles, passed the zereba, bound for some point of attack; and the
Sheikh Moussa, with every man he could muster, joined them in hot
haste.

So great had been the bustle and hurry of their departure that
Malcolm Skene, to his astonishment, found himself forgotten,
overlooked; and, full of hopeful thoughts, he lay quiet and still in
the poor apartment allotted to him, watching the strange
constellations and stars unknown to Europe through the unglazed
aperture that served as a window, and listening to the silence--if we
may use such a paradox--a silence that seemed to be broken only by
the pulsations of his own heart, as hope grew up in it suddenly, and
he thought that, considering a kind of crisis that had come in his
fate, now or never was the time to make a stroke for liberty, and to
elude, if possible, the few Arabs who were left to watch the gates in
the dense mimosa hedge that surrounded the zereba.

To elude them--but how?

The stars were singularly bright even for that hemisphere; but there
was no moon as yet, fortunately, and softly quitting his hut, he
looked sharply about the 'compound,' as it would be called in India,
and found himself alone there, unnoticed and unseen.  He drew near
the hedge in the hope of finding, as he ultimately did, an opening in
that barrier, a thinner portion of its dense branches, close to the
ground, and at once he proceeded to creep through.

How easy it seemed of accomplishment just then; but when the zereba
was full of armed men, and watchers and sentinels were numerous, the
attempt would have been useless.

Slowly, softly, and scarcely making a twig or a thorn crack, he drew
himself through on his hands and face ere many minutes passed;
minutes? they could not have been more than five, if so many; but
with life trembling in the balance, to poor Skene they seemed as ages.

At last he was through!

He was outside that hated place of confinement, every feature of
which he knew but too well, and every detail of which he loathed; and
yet he was not quite free.  Keen eyes might see him after all, and
every moment he expected to hear an alarm.

He thanked Heaven for the absence of the moonlight, and, favoured by
the obscurity, crept on his hands and knees for a considerable
distance ere he ventured to stand erect, to draw a long breath, and
with a prayer of hope and thankfulness on his lips, set out at a run
towards the Nile.

By the oft-studied landmarks he knew well in what direction the great
river lay, a few miles off, however.

A boat thereon, could he but find one, might be the means of ultimate
escape, by taking him lower down the stream to more civilized regions.

Anyway, he could not be worse off, be in greater hourly peril, or
have a more dark future, than when in the zereba, unless, too
probably, thirst and starvation came upon him.

While the darkness of night lasted, he had a certain chance of safety
and concealment, and he dared scarcely long for day and the perils it
might bring forth in a land where every man's hand was certain to be
against him.

He was totally defenceless, unarmed--oh, thought he, for a weapon of
any description, that he might strike, if not a blow for liberty or
life, at least one in defiance and for vengeance!

So, full of vague and desperate yet hopeful ideas, he pushed in the
direction to where he knew the river lay.  On its banks he hoped to
obliterate or leave behind all trace of his footsteps, for he knew
but too well the risk he ran of recapture on his flight or absence
being discovered; and that there were Arabs in the zereba who had
applied themselves diligently to the study of tracking or tracing the
human foot.

So acute are these men of vision that they can know whether the
footsteps belong to their own or to another tribe, and consequently
whether a friend or a foe has passed that way; they know by the depth
of the impression whether the man bore a load or not; by the
regularity of the steps whether the man was fatigued or fresh and
active, and hence can calculate to a nicety the chances of overtaking
him; whether he has trodden in sand or on grass, and bruised its
blades, and by the appearance of the traces whether the stranger had
passed on that day or several days before.

Malcolm Skene knew all this, and that with dawn they would be like
scenting beagles on his trail, hence his intense anxiety to reach the
river's bank.

Swiftly the dawn came in, red and fiery, and his own shadow and the
shadows of every object were cast far behind him.  He looked back
again and again; no sign of pursuit was in his rear.  In the distance
he saw a few Arab huts with _sakias_ or water-wheels, and then with
something like a start of joy that elicited an exclamation, he got a
glimpse of the river, rolling clear and blue, its banks a stripe of
narrow green, between the rocky, rugged, inexorable black mountains;
but there no boat floated on and no sail whitened the yellowish blue
of the Nile.  But the morning light was vivid, the breeze from the
river was pleasant and exultant, the glories of Nature were around
him, yet anxiety made him gasp for breath as he struggled forward.

Not a bird or other living thing was visible.  The silence was
intense, and not even an insect hummed amid the scrub mimosas; the
hot, red sun came up in his unclouded glory.  All seemed sad,
solitary, yet intensely sunny.

Ere long he did hear a sound of life; it was the shrill cry of a
little naked boy attending on a _sakia_ wheel.  Irrigation is done by
the latter, which is driven by oxen turning a chain of water-jars,
which admits of being lengthened as the river falls.  It is usually
enclosed in an edifice like an old tower, green with creeping plants,
and as the boy drives the oxen, his cry and the creaking of the great
wheel are sounds that never cease, day or night, by the Nile.

To avoid this _sakia_ and its too probable surroundings or adjuncts,
Malcolm Skene turned aside into a rocky chasm that overhung the river
at a considerable height, and then, far down below, on the blue
surface of the stream and between its banks, which in some places
were barred in by rocks, blackened by the sun and rent by volcanic
throes into strange fragments, and which in others, where the desert
touched the stream, was bordered by level sand, he saw a sight which,
were he to live a thousand years, he thought he could never, never
forget!

There, about half a mile distant, was a regular flotilla of boats,
manned by redcoats, with sails set and oars out--broad-bladed oars
that flashed like silver as they were feathered in the sunshine,
pulled steadily against the downward current of the river, and all
apparently advancing merrily within talking distance--a sight that
made his heart leap within his breast, for he knew that this was a
relieving column, or part of it, _en route_ for Khartoum!

For a minute he stood still, as if he could scarcely believe his
senses, or that he was not dreaming--paralysed, as it were, with this
sudden joy and sight--one far, far beyond his conception or hope of
ever being realised.

He stretched his tremulous hands towards these advancing boats; he
fancied he could hear the voices and see the faces of the oarsmen in
their white helmets and red coats; and never did 'the old red rag
that tells of Britain's glory' seem more dear to his eye and more
dear to his heart than at that supreme moment!

What force might already have passed up?

How many days had they been passing, and if so, how narrowly had he
escaped being left behind?  This was assuredly the Khartoum
Expedition, or part of it, and the recent bustle, consternation, and
excitement at the zereba of Moussa Abu Hagil were quite accounted for
now.

The sight of his comrades imbued him with renewed strength of mind
and purpose, and his whole soul became inspired with new impatience,
hope, and joy--hope on the eve of fulfilment.

While looking about for a means of descent to the river bank, from
whence to attract the attention of the nearest crew, he heard a sound
like a mocking laugh or ironical shout.  He turned and looked back,
and--with what emotions may be imagined, but not described--he beheld
a man clad like an Arab, and covering him with a levelled rifle, at
about a hundred yards' distance.

The condition of his uniform--in tatters long since--had not been
improved by the thorns of the prickly zereba hedge in his passage
through it; his helmet had since given place to a tarboosh, and, all
unkempt and unshorn, his aspect was somewhat remarkable now, but
quite familiar to Pietro Girolamo--for Girolamo it was--who knew him
in an instant.

Whether the revengeful Greek had tracked him or not, or whether
Moussa's followers were within hearing of a musket-shot, Skene might
never know; the fact was but too evident that, intent on death and
dire mischief, the Ionian Isleman and _ci-devant_ gambling-den keeper
was there, with his white, pallid visage, fierce hawk nose, long
jetty moustache, and gleaming black eyes.

Every detail of his tantalising and most critical position flashed on
the mind of Malcolm Skene.

On one hand were the boats of the River Column--life and freedom!

On the other, death--no captivity, but death, certain and sure; for
even if he escaped Girolamo, in the direction where the zereba lay he
could now see a cloud of dust, and amid it the dusky figures of men
and camels, with the gleam of burnished steel, and then within almost
his grasp, was Girolamo, rifle in hand, arresting his path to the
boats.

With another mocking laugh, the Greek levelled his weapon more
surely, took aim, and fired.

Skene heard--yes, felt--the bullet whiz past his ear.  Powerless,
defenceless, unarmed, his heart burned with rage and desperation at
the narrow escape his life had; but discretion and scheming were then
the better part of valour, and, with thought that came upon him quick
as a flash of lightning, instead of risking another discharge, he
resolved to feign death, and, after reeling round as if shot, he fell
on the ground.

Then he heard the steps of his would be assassin approach ing him
slowly and steadily, to give a _coup de grace_ if requisite with his
knife, perhaps, rather than to seek plunder, as Skene, he knew, would
possess nothing worth taking.

Restraining his breath till the Greek was close upon him, Skene lay
still; and then, as the former was about to stoop, he sprang to his
feet and confronted him.  So startled was Girolamo by this unexpected
movement that the rifle dropped from his hand, slipped over the
rocks, and the two enemies were face to face on equal terms, for
Girolamo was minus knife or poniard.

He clenched his teeth; his glittering eyes blazed; his long, lean
fingers were curled like the claws of a kite; and he uttered strange,
guttural sounds of astonishment and rage; but Skene had no time to
lose.

Straight out from the shoulder he planted his left fist, clenched,
with a dull thud on the hooked beak of Girolamo, followed by a
similar application of his right, and knocked him with a crash on the
rocks.

Agile as a tiger and blindly infuriated like one, the Greek sprang
again to his feet, and was rushing forward like a mad thing to get
Skene's throat in the grasp of his long and powerful fingers, which
would speedily have strangled the life out of him, but the latter
bestowed upon his antagonist another 'facer,' which sent more than
one of his sharp teeth rattling down his throat and loosened many of
the rest, covering his pale face with blood; but, blinded by fury--a
fury that endowed his wiry form with double strength--he closed in,
and contrived to encircle Skene in his grasp--an iron one; for, long
accustomed to a seafaring life, his muscles and nerves were like
bands of steel, and now came the tug of war, even while distant cries
came to the ears of the wrestlers.

No sound escaped either now, but hard and concentrated breathing; it
was a struggle for death or for life, and each scarcely paused a
moment to glare into the other's eyes.  Fiercely as the first of his
race and name is said to have grappled with the wolf in the wilds of
Stocket Forest, did Skene grapple with his athletic adversary.

Near the edge of the rocks that overhung the river at the end of the
chasm, backwards and forwards they swayed, locked in a savage and
deadly grasp.  Finding that every effort to uproot Skene, to get him
off his legs and throw him, so that he might resort to strangulation,
proved unavailing, he strove to drag him towards the Nile, in the
hope of flinging him down the bank; but whether the said bank was a
precipice of a hundred feet or only the drop of a few yards Skene
knew not, and in the blind fury of the moment, with pursuers coming
on, never thought of it.

Nearer and nearer the verge, by sheer strength of muscle and weight
of limb, the Greek was dragging him, and already some shouts in
English ascending from the bosom of the river evinced that the
struggle was visible from the boats; but Skene now gave up all hope
of being able to conquer his opponent or free himself from his
terrible grasp, and had but one thought--that if he perished, Pietro
Girolamo should perish too!

Now they were at the edge, the verge of what was evidently a
precipice of considerable height, and more fiercely and breathlessly
than ever did they wrench, sway, and grasp each other, their arms
tightening, as hatred, rage, and ferocious dread grew apace
together--the clamorous dread that one might escape the doom he meant
to mete out to or compel the other to share with him.

As last a species of gasping sigh escaped them.  Both lost their
footing at once and fell for a moment through the air; they then
crashed upon bushes and stones, and without relaxing their grasp
rolled over and over each other with awful speed down a precipitous
steep, sending before and bringing after them showers of gravel and
little stones, crashing through mimosa bushes and other scrub,
maimed, bruised, and covered with each other's blood, for some forty
feet or so.

Mad was the thirst for each other's destruction that inspired these
two men; for Malcolm Skene, by the peril and circumstances of the
time, was reduced to the level of the Ionian savage with whom he
fought--if fighting it could be called.

Another moment and they had rolled into the Nile--a fall, ere it was
accomplished, that in a second seemed to compress and contain the
epitome of life, and down they went under the surface, cleaving the
water at a rate that seemed to take all power out of heart and limb,
and, parting, they rose at a little distance from each other.

Faint and breathless Skene went down again, water bubbling in his
eyes, choking in his throat, and all breath had left him ere he rose
to the surface again, and saw Girolamo clinging to a rock round which
swept the beginning of a rapid.  He was visible for a moment only;
exhaustion made him relax his hold.  He sank, rose again only to
sink; then a hand was visible once or twice above the water as he was
swept away into eternity by the fierce current that bubbled round the
sun-baked rocks.

Then Skene felt hands laid upon him, and while English voices and
exclamations came pleasantly to his half-dulled ears, he was dragged
by soldiers on board one of the boats, where he lay so completely
exhausted as to be almost insensible; and he had not fallen into the
river a moment too soon, for, just as he did so, a group of armed
Arabs, the followers of Moussa Abu Hagil, crowned with a spluttering
fire of musketry, and with wild gesticulations, the rocks above the
Nile.




CHAPTER XLVI.

MAUDE'S VISITOR.

'The lives of some families,' it is said, 'are exactly like a pool in
which--without being exactly stagnant--nothing occurs to ruffle the
surface of the water from year's end to year's end, and then come a
series of tremendous splashes, like naughty boys throwing stones.'

So it was with the Lindsays of Earlshaugh latterly, as we will soon
have to show.

The few weeks of his leave of absence that intervened before Jack
Elliot would have inexorably to start for Egypt, glided happily and
all too swiftly away, when he and Maude took up their residence at
the pretty villa in the southern quarter of Edinburgh, near the
ancient Grange Loan; and often if they sat silent, or lingered hand
in hand amid the faded flower-beds of the garden, they seemed to be
only listening--if one may say so--to the silent responses of their
own hearts, and that language of instinct understood only by kindred
souls.

'We have not exactly Aladdin's lamp in the house, Maude,' said Jack
laughingly, 'nor have we all the luxuries of our future home at
Braidielee, where now conservatories are springing up, a
billiard-room being built, and gardens laid out, all for you; but we
are happy as people can be----'

'Who have a coming separation to face and to endure, Jack,' she
interrupted, with a break in her voice.

In the newspapers they read the announcement of the marriage, at
Earlshaugh, of 'Hawkey Sharpe, Esq., to Miss Annot Drummond, of South
Belgravia,' at which Jack laughed loud and long.

'Well, Roland _is_ lucky to be out of the running there!--Sharpe,
Esq.--I wonder he did not add "of Earlshaugh," and doubtless the
creature would figure in all Roland's splendid jewels and gifts.
Pah!' said he; but the gentle Maude had a kind of pity for the girl,
and her views of the matter were somewhat mingled.

Annot's mother had toiled always in the matrimonial market--long
unaided by the young lady herself--and now the latter had landed a
golden fish at last, as she thought, in the future heir of
Earlshaugh--Mr. Hawkey Sharpe!

No longer was she to be perplexed by questions how few or how many
thousand a year had such as Bob Hoyle, and on other delicate matters
dear to the Belgravian mater, and concerning 'detrimentals.'  After
more than one season spent in the chase, after dinners that were too
costly for a limited exchequer, handsome dresses and much showy
appearance, laborious days and watchful nights, snubs and
disappointments--_homme propose, femme dispose_--Annot was fairly off
her hands, and to be a 'Lady of that Ilk.'

She had played her cards in Scotland beautifully!

And now came to pass the event which ruffled the calm pool of Maude's
existence, when within three days of Elliot's departure to rejoin the
army in Egypt.  The crisis from which she ever shrank seemed now to
have come!

Oftentimes before this had she wondered whether it were possible such
unbroken happiness as her present life would ever come again, despite
the tender, earnest, and trusting love that glowed in her breast; and
on one particular evening, when Jack Elliot was absent making some
final preparations, and would not be home till late, she sat alone,
striving to prepare herself for the change, the solitude and anxiety
that were to come, and praying tearfully for strength to pass the
bitter ordeal--the wrench that was before them both.

This happy, happy honeymoon of a few weeks was drawing to its close,
and her soft blue eyes grew very full as she thought over the whole
situation, when a visitor was suddenly announced.

A showily-dressed and smart-looking little woman, about thirty years
of age apparently, rather pretty, but flippant and nervous in manner,
and having a slight _soupçon_ of 'making-up' about her cheeks and
eyelashes, was ushered in, and eyed, with some boldness and
effrontery (to conceal the nervousness referred to), Maude, who, by
force of habit, bowed and indicated a seat, which her visitor at once
took, and threw up her veil.

Maude saw that her features were good, but this colouring and
expression made them cunning and daring, if somewhat remarkable and
attractive.

Maude then remembering that this person had not sent in a card or
announced herself, inquired to what she owed the occasion of her
visit.

'The occasion--you'll soon know that--too soon for your own peace of
mind, poor girl!  You are--Miss Lindsay?'

'I was Miss Lindsay,' replied Maude.

'And who are you now?'

Maude stared at her visitor with some alarm.

'If you take an interest in Captain Elliot, it is a pity,' continued
the latter.

'Interest--pity?' questioned Maude, rising now, and drawing near to
the handle of the bell.

'Take my advice in time, and don't touch that!' said her strange
visitor with sudden insolence of manner, while something of
malevolence and triumph sparkled in her dark eyes.

'You must be mad, or----'

'Tipsy, you would say--I am neither; but I have that to say which you
may not wish to furnish gossip for your servants, so do not summon
them until I am gone.'

'Will you be so kind as to state at once the object of your visit?'
said Maude, with as much hauteur as she could summon to her aid.

'So you are his wife--a doll like you!  Mrs. Elliot of Braidielee,
you think yourself!' said the woman mockingly; 'I fear I have that to
tell which your dainty ears will not find very pleasant.  But "gather
ye rosebuds while ye may;" for ere long only the leaves, dead and
without fragrance, will be left you!'

Maude felt herself grow pale and tremble; she knew that there was a
great lunatic asylum somewhere in that quarter of the city, and began
to fear that her visitor was an escaped patient.  She moved a step
towards the bell again, and cast a lingering, longing glance at it,
on which the woman again said sharply:

'Don't!  Listen to me, I tell you!'

Placing her elbows on a small Chippendale table, off which, without
ceremony, she thrust a few books, she rested her chin upon her left
hand, and looking at the shrinking Maude steadily and defiantly--for
the perfect purity of the girl, her position in life, her whole
aspect and bearing filled this fallen one--for fallen she was--with
rivalry, envy, and hatred, she asked:

'Now, who do you think I am?'

'That I have yet to learn,' replied Maude, who was moving towards the
door, when the next words of the woman arrested her steps.

'Learn that I am Captain John Elliot's--lawful wife!'

'Oh--she is mad!' thought Maude, who neither tottered, nor fainted,
nor made any outcry, deeming the bold assertion as totally absurd.

'You don't believe me, I suppose?'

'You must hold me excused if I do not,' replied Maude, thinking that
she must temporise with a woman who, for all she knew, might bite her
like a rabid dog; for poor Maude had very vague ideas of the ways and
proclivities of lunatics in general.

She had but one desire, to rush past, to gain the door and escape;
but was baffled by the expression of the woman's watchful black eyes.
That she was not and never had been a lady was evident; neither did
she seem of the servant class; so Maude's inexperienced eye was
unable to fix her place in the scale of society, though her costume
was good--if showy--even to her well-fitting gloves.

'You would wish to see my marriage-lines, I doubt not,' said the
visitor with a smile, drawing a couple of folded papers from her
bosom; 'but perhaps you had better read this first.  I am a great
believer in documentary evidence, and hope you are so too.'

Somewhat ostentatiously she flattened out a letter on the table, but
carefully kept her hands thereon, as if in fear that it might be
snatched away by Maude; and impelled by an impressible but hideous
emotion of curiosity the latter drew near, and the woman with a
slender forefinger traced out the lines she wished her to read--lines
that seemed to seal the fate of Maude, whose dull eyes wandered over
them like one in a dreadful dream--for the letter, if a forgery, was
certainly to all appearance in the handwriting of Jack Elliot, and
some of its peculiarities in the formation of capitals and certain
other letters seemed to her too terribly familiar and indisputable.

They seemed to sear the girl's brain--the words she read--but
summoning all her self-control, and seeming scarcely to breathe, she
permitted as yet no expression of sorrow, of passion, or emotion of
any kind to escape her.


'DEAREST LITTLE WIFE,

'I write you, Maggie, as I promised, as I cannot see you before
leaving for Egypt, and fear the sorrow of such another parting as our
last may kill me, for you know that all the love of my heart is
yours, though I have been entrapped into a marriage with Maude
Lindsay--a mad entanglement, for which I ask your forgiveness and
pity, that you may not bring me to punishment and shame.  I will buy
your silence at any price; let me have back the marriage certificate
and all letters, and I herewith enclose a blank cheque for you to
fill up at your pleasure.  This I do, dear little one, for the sake
of our old----'


Here Maude reeled, for the room seemed to revolve round her.

'There!' said this odious woman exultingly, as she hastened to refold
the letter and replace it in her breast, 'will you deny it longer?'

The speaker showed neither the certificate nor the blank cheque; but
poor Maude had seen enough.  She fainted, and when she recovered her
obnoxious visitor was gone--gone, but had left a dreadful sting
behind.

Had her presence and her story been all a dream?  No!  There was the
chair in which she had been seated; there was the little Chippendale
table on which she had spread the terrible letter that told of Jack's
perfidy; and there on the floor, just where she had thrown or thrust
them, lay the scattered books--his presents in the past time.

She cast herself on the sofa--she could neither think nor weep; her
heart beat painfully--every pulsation was a pang!  What was she to
do--whither turn for advice before madness came upon her?


'Well, my old duck, Maggie, you have earned your money fairly, by all
accounts--and my wonderful caligraphy was quite a success!' said
Hawkey Sharpe, exploding with laughter, when he heard the narration
of his 'fair' compatriot or conspirator, as he handed her a
twenty-pound note, and drove with her townward in the cab with which
he had awaited the termination of her visit at the Grange Loan.  'By
Jove! a pleasant home-coming that fellow will have!  "All men are
brothers," says the minister of Earlshaugh; Cains and Abels, say I.'

'I don't care about him or what he may suffer--you men are all alike,
a bad, false, cruel lot,' replied the woman; 'but, with all her airs
and graces, her haughtiness and her touch-me-not manner, I _am_ sorry
for what that poor girl may be--nay, must be--enduring now.'

'The devil you are! all things are fair in love and war--and this is
_war_!' said Hawkey, still continuing his bursts of malignant
laughter; 'would she care for what you might endure?'

'I am sure she would--her face and her voice were so sweet and
gentle.'

'For all that she would draw aside her skirt if it touched yours, as
though there was a taint in the contact.'

The woman made no reply, but glared at him with defiant malevolence
in her bold black eyes, and now seemed shocked at the very act which,
a few minutes before, had given her much malignant satisfaction.

But we have not heard the last of Mr. Hawkey Sharpe's skill in
caligraphy.




CHAPTER XLVII.

THE RESULT.

Sense returned to the unhappy creature ere her servants discovered
her or knew that the mysterious visitor had departed.

'It cannot be!  It cannot have happened--it is too dreadful--too
cruel!' she repeated to herself again and again; but could she doubt
the tenor of the letter she had seen and read--the letter in her
husband's own handwriting?  'Oh, Heaven!' she murmured; 'our days
together have been so blithesome and so happy, even when their
brightest hours were clouded by a separation to come; but Oh, not
such a separation as this!  What have I done that God deems me so
unworthy--that I am tortured, punished thus?'

'There is scarcely in the whole sad world,' it is said, 'and in the
woeful scale of mental suffering, aught sadder than the helpless
struggle of a poor human heart against a crushing load of misery,
strengthening itself in its despair, taking courage from the
extremity of its wretchedness in the frenzied whispers of
reassurance.'

Thus did Maude continue to whisper to herself: 'It cannot be--it
cannot be!'

She passed her hot hand several times across her throbbing forehead;
her brain was too confused--too unable yet to grapple with this
disillusion, the miserable situation, and with all the new and sudden
horrors of her false and now degraded position in the world--in
society, and in life!

She had heard stories; she had vague ideas of the temptations to
which young men--young officers more than all--are subjected; and
Jack might have been the victim of some hour of weakness, or evil, or
treachery.

Holding by the bannisters, she ascended to her bedroom--_their_ room,
as it was but one short hour ago--and there on every hand were
souvenirs of Jack which had once seemed so strange amid the
appurtenances of her toilet; the slippers she had worked for him were
under the dressing-table; his razors and brushes lay thereon; his
pipes littered the mantelpiece; and his portmanteaux and helmet-case,
ready for Egypt, stood in a corner.

Novels Maude had read, plays she had seen, stories she had heard of,
in which concealed marriages and other horrors had been amply
detailed; and in the heart of one of these episodes she now found
herself, as they crowded on her memory with bewildering force and
pain.

She strove to think, to gather her thoughts, in vain.  Jack could not
be so vile, and yet there was that letter--that horrible letter!

'If this woman is his wife--what then am I?  Oh, horror and
misery--horror and misery!' thought Maude, covering her face with her
tremulous hands, while the hot tears gushed between her slender
fingers.

Was all this happening to her or to some one else?  She almost
doubted her own identity--the evidence of her senses.  A moment or
two she lingered at a window wistfully looking over the landscape,
which she had often viewed from thence with Jack's arm round her, and
her head on his shoulder, watching dreamily the light of the setting
sun falling redly on the long wavy slope of the lovely Pentlands, or
the nearer hills of Braid, so green and pastoral, the scene of
Johnnie of Braidislee's doleful hunting in the ancient time, and
where in a lone and wooded hollow lies the dreary Hermitage beside
the Burn, haunted, it is said, in the present day by the unquiet
spirit of the beautiful Countess of Stair, the victim of a double and
repudiated marriage, and whose wrongs were of the days when George
IV. was king; and now as Maude looked, the farewell rays of the sun
were fading out on the summit of bluff Blackford, the haunt of
Scott's boyhood, and then the sober hues of twilight followed.  Of
the hill he wrote:

  'Blackford! on whose uncultured breast
  A truant boy I sought the nest,
  Or listed as I lay at rest;
    While rose on breezes thin
  The murmur of the city crowd:
  And from his steeple jangling loud
  St. Giles's mingling din.'


'All is over and ended--God help me!' wailed the girl many times as
she wrung her white and slender hands, and yet prepared nervously and
quickly to take measures that were stern and determined.  There
seemed to be a strange loneliness in the sunset landscape as she
turned from it, and thought how beautiful, yet cruel and terrible,
the world of life can be, and choking sobs rose in her throat.

Should she await Jack's return--face him out and demand an
explanation?  No, a thousand times no; there seemed degradation in
receiving one.  Her resolution was taken; she would leave now and for
ever, and now with the coming night a long journey to London was to
be faced--to London, where she would quickly be lost to all the world
that knew her once.

Jack would not be home (home!) for hours yet, but no time was to be
lost, and action of any kind was grateful to her tortured spirit.

She quickly dressed herself for travelling; reckoned over what was in
her purse, and what was in her desk, and for more than an hour sat
writing--writing endless and incoherent letters of farewell and
upbraiding--letters which she tore in minute fragments by the score,
as none of them seemed suitable to the awful occasion.  At last she
feverishly ended one; placed it in an envelope, addressed it--oh how
tremulously!--and placed it on the toilet table, where he was sure to
find it when she would be far away.

'I now know all--all about "Maggie!"' ran the letter.  ('Who the
devil is Maggie?' thought the terrified and bewildered Jack when he
_did_ come, to peruse it.)

'You cannot forget that I once loved you--that I love you still,
when--oh, my God!--I have no right to do so, nor can you forget the
misery that obliges me to take this step and leave you.  Oh, Jack!
Jack!

'God forgive you, but you have broken my heart!

'When you read this, Jack, I shall be gone--gone to London or
elsewhere--to where you shall never be able to follow or to trace me
in my hiding place.

'The horrors of a public scandal must be avoided; but how, and
however cautious our mode of action?'

'I shall never see you more--never from this evening; never again
hope for a renewal of happiness; and yet with all your perfidy, Jack,
your memory will always be most precious to me, and I only fear I
shall always love you too well!'

Much more in the same incoherent style followed.

Time was short; she moved about noiselessly.  She drew sharply off
her bracelet and brooch, which were gifts of Jack's; she did more;
she drew off her wedding ring with its keeper, her engagement ring
also, and placed them in another envelope; she put a few necessary
garments and toilet appurtenances into a travelling-bag, stole from
the house, found a cab, and ordered the man to drive her at once to
the railway station for London.

It was night, now, and the silent suburbs had been left behind, and
the cab, swift and well-horsed, and all unlike a London 'crawler,'
bowled through the busy streets that were flooded with light.

She was off--the die was cast!  Nothing occurred to hinder or delay
her, nor did she wish for any such thing at that time.

It was not too late to return; but why should she return--and to
_whom_?--'Maggie's' husband? and she set her little teeth firmly and
defiantly, as she was driven along the platform of the Waverley
Station, with the city lights towering high in the air above her, and
where the train that was to bear her away was all in readiness for
starting.

A new but unnatural kind of life seemed opening up to her, and under
her thick Shetland veil her hot tears welled freely.  Until she was
quite alone now, she knew not what a feature Jack had been in her
life, what an influence his presence had upon her; and now their days
of earnest and peaceful love were over, and his whispers of
endearment would fall upon her ear no more.  Withal, she had a
stunned feeling, and she began to accept her present position as if
it was the result of something that had happened long, long ago, with
a kind of desperate resignation and grim indifference as to what her
own future might bring forth.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

'INFIRM OF PURPOSE!'

The night, one of the last of autumn, was very cold.  She had secured
a compartment to herself, fortunately; but there was no kind hand to
adjust her rugs, to see that the foot-warmer was hot, to provide her
with amusing periodicals, or attend to her little comforts in any
way.  She did not miss them, but she missed Jack.

All her actions were mechanical, and it was not until she was fairly
away in the last train for the South, and had emerged from the Gallon
Tunnel, leaving Edinburgh with all its lights and lofty mansions
behind, that she quite knew she was--vague and desperate of
purpose--on her way to London.

As the hours dragged slowly on--so slowly in strange contrast to the
lightning-like speed of the clanking train that bore her away--she
thought, would she ever forget that dreadful and hopeless night
journey--in itself a nightmare--fleeing from all she loved, or had
loved her, with no future to realise?  Would she ever forget that
dreadful, mocking woman, with her painted cheeks and cunning black
eyes--her letter and her visit, every incident and detail of which
seemed photographed in her heart and on her brain?

Mentally she conned over and thought--till her head grew weary--of
the letter she was to write Roland on the subject, and how this new
distress must pain and shock him.

On, on went the train; the stars shone bright in the moonless sky;
the smoke of the engine streamed far behind, and strange splashes of
weird light were cast on hedges, fields, and trees, on bank cuttings
and other features on either side of the way.

Now she had a glimpse of Dunbar, with its square church tower of red
sandstone; now it was Colbrands-path, with all its wild woods and
ravines; anon it was the German Sea, near Fast Castle, rolling its
free waves in white foam against steep and frowning precipices; and a
myriad lights gleaming on the broad river far down below announced
the bordering Tweed at Berwick, and Scotland was left behind.

She lowered the windows from time to time, for her temples felt hot
and feverish.  She seemed to have nothing left her now but light and
air, and just then the former was absent and the latter choking; and
to her tortured soul life had but lately seemed so beautiful.

'How proud I was of his love! oh happy, happy days that can return no
more!' were her ever recurrent thoughts.

Yet such love as he had professed for her had been but a disgrace and
a sham!  With all her affection, earnest and true, when she reflected
how far he must have gone, and so daringly, out of his way to deceive
her, and to throw dust in the eyes of her and her brother Roland, she
felt one moment inclined to hate and scorn him, and the next her
heart died within her at such a state of matters; and, with all her
shattered trust, love came back again--but love for what--for _whom_?

Then came other thoughts.

Why had she been so precipitate?  What if the whole apparent
catastrophe was some dire but explainable mistake?  Why had she not
consulted Hester, who was so clever, so gentle, and loving, and her
old uncle, Sir Harry?  But he was old and sorely ailing now.

_Infirm of purpose_, she began to fear that she had been perhaps too
rash, and starting up, as if she would leave the carriage, she began
to think--to think already--that to undo all she had done, she would
give her right hand.

Her left--it bore no wedding-ring now.  She looked at her
watch--midnight; long ere this Jack must have known that she had
discovered all!

Morning drew on, and in its colder, purer air and atmosphere her
thoughts seemed to become clearer, and as the train glided on through
the flat and monotonous scenery of England she began to consider the
possibility that she might have been deceived--that she had been too
swift in avenging her wrongs, or supposed wrongs--and this impression
grew with the growing brightness of the reddening dawn, and with that
impulsiveness which was characteristic of her, an hour even before
the dawn came, she resolved that she would return--she would face the
calamity out; she would cast herself upon her friends--not on the
world; but how to stop the train, which flew on and on, inexorably on
past station after station, every one of which seemed almost dark and
deserted.

The steam was let off suddenly; the speed of the train grew slower
and slower; it stopped at last in an open and sequestered place, on
an embankment overlooking a great stretch of darkened, dimly seen,
and flat country, half shrouded, as usual, in haze and mist.

Heads in travelling caps and strange gear were thrust from every
window; inquiries were made anxiously and angrily; but no answer was
accorded; the officials seemed all to have become very deaf and
intensely sullen, while no passenger could alight, as every door was
securely locked, to their alarm and indignation.

There was evidently an accident or a breakdown--a block on the line
somewhere, no one knew precisely what.  Signals were worked and
lights flashed to avert destruction from the front or rear, and when
the rush of a coming train was heard, 'the boldest held his breath
for a time,' till it swept past--an express--on another line of rails.

If she were killed--smashed up horribly like people she had often
read of in railways accidents, would Jack be sorry for her?  There
was a kind of revengeful pleasure in the thought, the conviction that
he would be, even while she dropped a few natural tears over her own
untimely demise.

The excitement grew apace.  The next train might _not_ be on the
other line, and the mental agony of the travellers lasted for more
than an hour--an hour of terror and misery, and of the wildest
impatience to Maude, who in the tumult of her spirits would have
welcomed the crash, the destruction, and, so far as she was
personally concerned, the death by a collision, to end everything.

At last the steam was got up again, and slowly the train glided into
the brilliant station at York just as dawn was reddening the square
towers of its glorious minster, and the pale girl sprang out on the
platform to find that the train for Edinburgh had passed nearly two
hours before, and that she would have to wait--to wait for hours with
what patience she could muster.

Great was the evil and distress Hawkey Sharpe, in a spirit of useless
revenge, had wrought her.

How slow the returning train was--oh, how slow!  It seemed to stop
everywhere, and to be no sooner off than it stopped again.  Stations
hitherto unnoticed had apparently sprung up like mushrooms in the
night, and the platforms were crowded with people perpetually getting
in or going out.

How long ago it seemed since last night--since that fatal visit, and
since she left her pretty home, if home it was.

Even then, in the dire confusion and muddle of her thoughts, they
lingered lovingly on the apparently remote memory of the happiest
period of her young life--the day when Jack Elliot first said he
loved her, and she had the joy of believing him to be entirely her
own, to go hand-in-hand with through the long years that were to
come--and now--now!


Looking forward to ample explanations from him, perhaps an entire
reconciliation with him if these explanations were complete--or she
knew not what--how the revolving wheels of the train seemed to lag!
Then she would close her tear-inflamed eyes and strive not to think
at all.

Already the Lion mountain of Arthur Seat, and the Gallon with its
Grecian columns, were rising into sight, and she would soon be at her
destination.

To save appearances even before her servants--a somewhat useless
consideration then--as even without the usual sharpness of their
class they must now be aware of the fact that something unpleasant
was on the _tapis_, and that their mistress had, unexplainedly, been
absent from her own home for a whole night and longer; as the train
approached the capital, Maude smoothed her sunny-brown hair, adjusted
her laces, and bathed her pale face with _eau-de-cologne_.  Oh, how
grimy the process made her handkerchief after the dust of her long
and double journey!

The afternoon of the day was well advanced when Maude, still paler,
weary, unslept, and unrefreshed, faint from want of food and the wear
and tear of her own terrible thoughts, arrived once more at the
pretty villa Jack's love had temporarily provided for her.

The blinds were all closed as if death were in its walls, and her
heart died within her.

She rushed up to her room; it might just be the case that Jack might
not have returned, and she might still find the packet she had
addressed to him and her incoherent letter of farewell.

Is she in time?  Yes--a letter is there--a packet on her
toilet-table; she _is_ in time--and makes a snatch of it.  It is
addressed not to her but to Hester Maule at Merlwood; so Jack had
been there and was gone, as were also his portmanteaux, his sword,
and helmet-case.

In wild and vague search she moved swiftly from room to room.

'Jack--Jack!' she called in a low voice that sounded strangely
resonant in the silent rooms; but there was no answer, nor did any
sound evince that he was in her vicinity.  A chill crept over her,
and she strove in vain to shake it off as her wondering servants
gathered round her, and from them she soon learned all.

Their master had returned late last night--had got her letter, and,
after a time, had driven away to catch the first early train for
London--on his way to Egypt, he simply said.  Egypt!  His train must
have passed her somewhere on the line.  Where was she to seek
him--where telegraph to him?  Who was to advise her now?

He had made up a packet of her letters, her rings, and other little
mementos she had left, with a brief and certainly incoherent note to
Hester Maule; addressed it with a tremulous hand and carefully sealed
it with his familiar signet, bearing the baton or on a bend engrailed
of the Elliots of Braidielee; and then, throwing himself into a cab,
had driven away with no other trace than his farewell words given to
the startled domestics.

Apart from the humiliation of uselessly attempting to explain matters
to them, it was somewhat gratifying to Maude to learn that after his
return 'the poor master' had been for a time quite quiet, as if
stunned; then that he had been like 'a tearing lunatic'; had
telegraphed to Merlwood, to Braidielee, and even to Earlshaugh for
tidings of her, but in vain; and in the latter instance, fully
informing Hawkey Sharpe that the train the latter had laid was ending
in an explosion; and then that 'the master' had set off by daybreak.

He was not at his club in Queen Street.

Could he have taken London _en route_ to Southampton, in the wild,
vague hope of tracing her?

Eventually she was made aware that he had written to his own agents,
and to Mr. M'Wadsett, to endeavour to elucidate the mystery which
hung over the actions of Maude, the author of the forged letter, and
to look after her during his probably prolonged absence in Egypt.

Thus, in rage and bewilderment, grief and anxiety, had Jack Elliot
taken his departure, never doubting that they were both the victims
of some nefarious plot, which he had not then time to unravel.

He was indignant, too, that Maude should so cruelly mistake and doubt
him.  He started for Egypt some twenty-four hours sooner than he need
have done, and hence came fresh complications.

'Oh, what new and unexpected worry is this, Maude?' exclaimed Hester
Maule, when a few hours later the girl threw herself speechless and
in a passion of tears into her arms.

And now, or eventually, three lives they were interested in beyond
all others (if Malcolm Skene survived), would be involved in the
terrible risks of the war in the Soudan.




CHAPTER XLIX.

CHRISTMAS DAY IN CAMP AT KORTI.

The last days of December saw Roland Lindsay with his regiment--the
1st Battalion of the South Staffordshire--of old, the 38th--a corps
of the days of Queen Anne--the corps of the gallant old Luke
Lillingston, who led the troops in Wilmot's West Indian Expedition of
1695--toiling in the boats up the great river of Egypt against strong
currents by Kodokal, and within sight of the ruins of old
Dongola--ruins of red brick covering miles--by Debbeh, where the
currents were stronger still, and awnings could not be used, though
the heat was 120 degrees, and the men became giddy and distracted by
the white glare and the hot simmering atmosphere, with lassitude and
thirst, and where it was so terrible at times, to emerge from the
shadow of some impending rock, once more to plod and pull the heavy
oar under the fierce and fiery sun.  Though occasionally spreading
the big sails like wings on each side of the boats, they would have a
pleasant hour's run in the evening ere darkness or a rapid barred
their upward way.

Then, on the redly-illuminated waters of the mighty and mysterious
river, the white sails of the squadron would show up pleasantly in
the twilight, after the landscape had been ablaze with that rich
profusion of colour only to be seen where dark rocky hills, yellow
desert sand, and patches of verdant vegetation border, as they do on
the upper reaches of the Nile.

Then, when darkness came, the boats would close in with the shore,
where they were moored to a bank, and the sails were lowered and
stowed on board; while under the feathery palms, or date trees, fires
were lighted, the frugal ration of bully-beef, onions, and potatoes
was cooked and eaten amid the jollity and lightness of heart which
are ever a characteristic of our soldiers, and then the poor fellows
would coil themselves up to sleep and prepare for the coming toil of
the morrow.

On the 22nd of December the camp at Korti was reached at 9.30 in the
evening, after a hard struggle amid a labyrinth of sand banks.
Roland found the camp to be prettily situated on the edge of the
river, and surrounded by mimosa trees, and there the advanced guard
of the expedition, detailed to relieve Gordon and raise the siege of
the doomed city, was now assembling fast.

It was a spot never trod by Britons before.  There the caravans from
Egypt to Sennar quit the Nile and proceed across the Bayuda Desert,
the route from Dongola being easy for travelling, and the land on
both banks of the river rich and fertile.

At Korti, where now every hour or so our bugles were blown, there
stood in the days of Thothemus III. a great temple dedicated to Isis,
whose tears for the loss of Osiris caused the regular inundations of
the Nile.

Under some wide spreading trees the tents of the Camel Corps were
pitched along the western bank of the latter; and the whole scene
there was most picturesque.  The leafy shade tempered the fierce heat
of the sun, and, after their long toil in the boats and over the
burning sands and glittering rocks, our soldiers were charmed for a
time with the place; but some wrath was excited when it was
discovered that a correspondence between a French journalist in the
camp of the Mahdi before Khartoum, and a clique in Cairo, supplied
the former with the fullest information of Lord Wolseley's
proceedings, with hints as to the best means of baffling them.

Though the enemy were at some distance, every precaution was taken
against a surprise by night.  Cavalry vedettes were posted out beyond
the camp by day, and strong outlying pickets, with chains of advanced
sentries by night; but, as Christmas Day drew near, considerable
anxiety was felt in the camp at Korti at the total cessation of all
news from blockaded Khartoum, which was two hundred and sixty miles
distant by the desert, and by river where the former touched the
latter at Gubat or Abu Kru.

The total strength of the advanced force at Korti, after the
departure of Roland's regiment, was under two thousand five hundred
men, with six screw guns, two thousand two hundred camels and horses,
two pinnaces, and sixty-four whale boats, while the 19th Hussars,
when the advance began, had orders to ride by the western bank of the
Nile and act as scouts to the Khartoum relief column.

By this time there was not a single sound garment in the latter--the
result of fifty days' river work from Sarras.  The mud-stained
helmets were battered out of all shape; the tunics and trousers were
patched with cloth of every kind and hue; officers and men had beards
of many days' growth, and the skin of their faces was peeled off in
strange and uncouth patches, the result of incessant exposure to the
fierce sun by day and the chill dews by night.

Christmas morning, 1884, was ushered in by a church parade, and by
prayer, when the whole force--slender though it was--was present,
under the feathery palms, by the banks of the Nile, that river of
mystery, which has its rise in a land unknown; and at night the
soldiers gathered round two great camp-fires and made merry, singing
songs, and doubtless thinking of those who were far away at home.

It was on this occasion that the South Staffordshire, under the
gallant Eyre, raised three hearty cheers, when, from the rear, a
telegram was brought, sent all the way from their second battalion in
England, wishing 'all ranks a happy Christmas and a brilliant
campaign.'

And happy and jolly all certainly were, though they were now in the
region of bully-beef, for they fared on hard biscuits and coffee in
the morning, with bully-beef for tiffin, and bully-beef for dinner.

As the evening of Christmas Day closed in, Roland, with a cigarette
in his mouth, reclined on the grass under a mimosa bush, watching the
picturesque groups of tanned and tattered soldiers that hovered round
the two great watch-fires, which cast weird patches of light on the
feathery palms, the glittering piles of arms, the few white tents
occupied by Lord Wolseley's staff and officers of rank; on the long
rows of picketed camels; on the distant figures of the advanced
sentinels seen darkly against the sky of pale green and orange that
showed where the sun had set beyond Gebel Magaya in the Bayuda
Desert; on the quaint boats and barges moored in the Nile; and on the
broad flow of that majestic river, reddened as it was by the flames,
to which the active hands and sharp bill-hooks of the soldiers added
fuel every moment; while the high spirits of the troops--seldom wont
to flag--were irrepressible then in the great hope of getting
on--getting on and reaching Khartoum--to shake hands with Gordon ere
it might be--too late!

In three days the South Staffordshire were to start and take the lead
in that eventful expedition, and led by jovial Dick Mostyn, Wilton,
and other kindred spirits; already the soldiers were chorusing a song
with which they meant to bend their oars; and more than once, as they
sang, they turned to where their favourite officer, Roland Lindsay,
lay looking on, for he was one of those men who are by nature and
habit born to be the leader of others, and possessing that kind of
magnetic influence which inspires confidence.

Roland had plenty of spirit, bodily vigour, and perseverance; but
when a halt came, and with it a brief term of rest, he could not help
indulging in occasional regretful thoughts, haunting memories, and
wishes that were hopeless.  He had, as Annot anticipated, got over
his rudely-dispelled passion for her, true love it could not have
been, he flattered himself now, and he was fully justified in
dismissing _her_ from his mind; and in that matter he was disturbed
by the fact no more 'than a nightmare disturbs the occupations of the
dreamer, as he goes about his business on the following day in the
full light of heaven, and with his brain clear of the idle fantasies
of the darkness.'

But now he could not help thinking of Hester Maule, especially as he
had seen her last, when she stood at the door of Merlwood, and
murmured good-bye, her hand in his, her dark blue eyes dimmed with
gathering tears--the tears that he knew would fall when he was
gone--her graceful head drooping towards him, and how he now, as
then, longed to whisper in her little white ear the words he scarcely
knew how to utter, and which were withheld through very shame of
himself.

Earlshaugh he deemed, of course, now gone from his family for ever;
well, it was only one more case of the now daily sinking out of
sight, the decay or destruction of good old Scottish families, while
mushrooms came up to take their place in the land, though seldom in
history.

Roland had and still loved Hester, and in his heart believed in her
as an embodiment of all that is good and pure in womanhood; but
rather unwisely had allowed the fact to be guessed at by her,
thinking that she understood him, and that his declaration might be
made at any time; and, as we have shown, he was quite upon the point
thereof, when Annot Drummond came with her wiles and smiles to prove
the evil genius of them both.

In connection with Annot's name he almost let his scornful lips form
a malediction now--that name once linked with the dearest and fondest
terms his fancy could frame.  Yet he could not even now class all
women under her category, and believe that beauty was given them for
the sole purpose of winning men's hearts without losing their own.
But his reflections at times on his own folly were fiery and bitter
for all that; and as a sedative he enjoyed to the utmost extent the
daily excitement of active service now in that remarkable land, the
Soudan.

Christmas-night in the camp at Korti was indeed a merry one, and
although under the eyes of Lord Wolseley and his staff, the soldiers
were in no way repressed in their jollity and fun--for a little of
the latter goes a long way in the army--and, all unlike the Northern
Yule to which they were accustomed, it was without snow or icicles,
holly-berries, mistletoe, and plum-pudding; but those who lingered
round these watch-fires on the arid sand of the Soudan had many a
kindly and tender thought of the bright family circles, the loved
faces, and household scenes of those who were dear to them, and were
so far, far away beyond the drear Bayuda Desert, and beyond the seas,
in many a pretty English village, where the Christmas carols were
being sung while the chimes rang joyously in the old ivied steeple,
in memory of the star that shone over Bethlehem--the herald of peace
and goodwill to men.

Ere that festival came again more than one battle had to be
fought--Khartoum would be lost or won--Gordon saved or abandoned and
betrayed--and many a young heart that was full of joy and hope would
be as cold as inexorable death could make it; but no thought of these
things marred the merry night our soldiers spent as they turned into
the bivouac at Korti--for though called a camp, it was scarcely a
complete one.

Dick Mostyn had procured some wine from an enterprising Greek sutler;
and this he shared freely with Lindsay and others while it lasted.

Though poor, and such as was never seen on the mess-table, it was
voted 'capital stuff,' in that part of the world, and Dick--with a
sigh--wished his 'throat was a mile long,' as he drained the last of
it.

'Such a wonderful flow of spirits you always have, Dick!' said
Lindsay.

'Well--I have made up my mind to be jolly, remembering Mark Tapley
and his Eden,' replied Mostyn.

'Jolly on your couch--the sand?'

'Jolly as a sandboy--yes; yet not disinclined to pray for the man who
invented a good feather-bed, even as Sancho Panza did for him who
invented sleep.'

Indeed, Mostyn admitted that he was happier in the Soudan than he had
been in England.

He had fluttered the dovecots of the West End with tolerable success,
and might have 'bagged an heiress,' as he phrased it; but high stakes
at his club, bets on every possible thing; a bad book on the Derby,
ditto on the Oaks; unpaid accounts--St. John's Wood and 'going to the
devil on all fours,' marred his chances; then his gouty old governor
had come down upon him with his 'cut-you-off-with-a-shilling face;'
and Dick thought he was well out of all his troubles, and had _only_
the Arabs to face in the Soudan.

Next day the regiment was inspected and highly complimented by Lord
Wolseley, as 'the first to come up with the boats,' adding, 'I know
you will do credit to the county you are named after and to the
character you have won.  I am proud to have such a battalion on
service with me.'

This ceremony was scarcely over and the soldiers' dinner drum been
beaten as a summons once more to bully-beef and hard biscuits, when a
few boats brought up a detachment that marched at once into camp,
where crowds gathered round them, as newcomers, to hear the last news
from the rear, as letters were becoming scarce and newspapers just
then still more so.

A tall officer who was in command, with his canvas haversack,
water-bottle, revolver-case, and jack-knife dangling about him, and
whose new fighting suit of gray contrasted with the tattered attire
of Roland and others, came towards them with impatient strides.




CHAPTER L.

THE START FOR KHARTOUM.

'Elliot, can this be Jack Elliot?' exclaimed Dick Mostyn as he
screwed an eyeglass into his left eye.  'By Jove, he looks as if he
had a bad toothache!  What's up, Jack--lost your heart to some fair
Cairene on the Shoubrah road--eh?'

'Jack Elliot it is!' said Roland, as the officer in question, after
'handing over' his detachment, made his way to the quarters of the
South Staffordshire, 'you are just in time to go up the river with
us.  We are on the eve of starting for Khartoum.'

'At last!'

'Yes, at last,' continued Roland, as they grasped each other's hands,
and the latter, when looking intently into his brother-in-law's face,
detected a grave, grim, keen-eyed, harassed, and even haggard
expression, which was all unlike the jovial, free, and open one he
was wont to see there.  'Why, Jack,' said he, 'what the devil is up?
Are you ill with fever, or what?  Did you leave all well at home?' he
added as he drew him aside.

'Well--yes--I suppose; but ill or well, thereby hangs a tale--a devil
of a tale; but ere I can tell it, give me something to drink, old
fellow--my water-bottle is empty--flask ditto, and then I shall
relate that which you would rather not hear.'

Jack unbuckled and flung his sword aside, while Roland hastily and
impatiently supplied his wants, and then heard his brief, rapid, and
startling story, winding up with the disappearance of Maude from the
villa, and the incoherent and mysterious letter of farewell she left
for him.

'After this--the deluge!' exclaimed Roland in the direst perplexity.

'God and my own heart only know what it cost me to start for the seat
of war, leaving Maude, as I did, untraced, unfollowed, and
undiscovered; but I had neither time nor an address to follow up,'
sighed Elliot; 'and God only knows, too, how all this has cut her as
it must have cut her--my poor darling--to the soul!'

The meeting of Roland and Jack Elliot was one of perplexity, gloom,
and genuine distress.  Far away from the land where they could be of
help or use in unravelling the mystery, or succouring Maude, whom
they deemed then a houseless fugitive, they felt themselves miserably
powerless, hopeless, and exasperated; but curiously, perhaps, they
never thought of suspecting the real author of the mischief, and were
utterly at a loss to conceive how such a complication and accusation
came about in any way.

Neither Jack nor Roland could know or conceive that she was safe
under her uncle's wing at Merlwood.  Thus they had to endure the
anxiety of supposing her, with all her beauty, refinement, and
delicacy, to be adrift in some homeless, aimless, and despairing way
in London--haunted by anger and terror of an injury and irreparable
wrong.  The contemplation of this state of affairs filled the minds
of both with incessant torture--a torture for which there was no
relief, and would be none, either by letter or telegraph, for a long
time, if ever, to them, as inexorably--in two days now--the regiment
would be again on the Nile.

'Reason how we may,' was the ever-recurring and gloomy thought of
Roland now, 'it has been said that Fate does certainly pursue some
families to their ruin and extinction, and such is our probable
end--the Lindsays of Earlshaugh!'

And so, apart from their brother officers, these two conversed and
talked of the mysterious episode of the woman and her claims again
and again, viewing it in every imaginable way, till they almost grew
weary of it, in the hopelessness of elucidating it while in the
Soudan; and as for poor Malcolm Skene and _his_ fate, that was
supposed to be a thing of the past, and they ceased to surmise about
it.

At 2 p.m. on the 28th of December the start for Khartoum began!

It was made by the South Staffordshire, under the gallant Eyre, with
exactly 19 officers and 527 men of the Regiment, and 2 officers and
20 men of the Royal Engineers in 50 boats, having the Staffordshire
Knot painted on their bows, the badge of the old '38th.'

The sight was a fine and impressive one; the band was playing merrily
in the leading boat, as usual, Scottish and Irish airs, as England,
apparently, has none for any martial purpose.  Thus it is that
Scottish and Irish quicksteps are now ordered by the Horse Guards for
nearly all the English regiments, with Highland reels for the
Cavalry, and one other air in the 'Queen's Regulations,' with which
we bid farewell to the old colours, is 'Auld Lang Syne.'

Steadily the whole battalion moved up stream, cheering joyously--the
first away for Khartoum--exhibiting a regularity and power of stroke
as they feathered their oars, and showing how much recent practice
had done to convert them into able boatmen, and soon the camp was
left behind, and the boats had the bare desert on both sides of the
stream; but on and on they went, stemming the current of the famous
Nile, famous even in the remotest ages, when the Egyptians worshipped
the cow, the cat, the ibis, and the crocodile, and when King
Amenchat, sixth of the Twelfth Dynasty, cut his huge river-like canal
to join Lake M[oe]ris, 250 miles lower down.

On the 29th the Staffordshire boats were off the island of Massawi,
where the atmosphere was grilling, being 120 degrees in the shade;
but the soldiers were in the highest spirits, their regiment being
the leading one of the whole army.

One scorching day followed another, yet on and on they toiled
unwearyingly, passing Merawi and Abu Dom amid date-trees and rank,
gigantic tropical vegetation, till the New Year's Day of 1885 found
them nearing the foot of a cataract, after passing which the River
Column was to form for its final advance on Khartoum.  Already the
uniforms were more than ever ragged, and scarcely a man had boots to
his feet.

Roland and Elliot had command of different boats, so they could
commune no more, even when they moored for the night by the river's
bank, when the crimson sun had set in ruddy splendour beyond the gray
hills of the Bayuda Desert, and the dingy yellow of the Nile was
touched by the afterglow, in which its waves rippled in purple and
silver sheen, while the dark, feathery palms and fronds swayed slowly
to and fro in the friendly breeze, and the great pelicans were seen
to wade amid the slime and ooze where the hideous crocodiles were
dozing.

In some places the boats were rowed between islets which displayed a
wondrous tropical wealth of dhurra, sugar-canes, and cotton-trees,
with palms innumerable.

Officers and men--even chaplains--worked hard at the oars in their
anxiety to get on.  For days some never had the oar out of their
hands; on others they were hauling the boats over the rapids and up
cataracts, where at times they stuck in rocks and sandbanks, and had
to be unloaded and lifted bodily off.  At times the pulling was
awful, and the hot sun scorched the back like fire, while the boats
seemed to stand still in places where the main stream forced itself
between masses of rock in a downward torrent, forming ugly
whirlpools, about which the only certainty was, that whoever fell
into them was drowned.

'Pull for your lives,' was then the cry; 'give way, men--give way
with a will!  Pull, or you'll be down the rapids.'

Then might be seen the men with their helmets off, bare-headed, and
braving sunstroke under that merciless sunshine; steaming with
perspiration--their teeth set hard--their hearts panting with the
awful and, at times, apparently hopeless exertion of pulling against
that mighty barrier of downward rolling water against which they
seemed to make no head; yet ever and anon the cry went up:

'Pull, my lads, cheerily--we'll shake hands with old Gordon yet!'

And so they toiled on--now up to their knees in mud, now up to their
chins in water, in rags and tatters, their blistered and festered
hands swathed in dirty linen bandages, officers and men alike; often
hungry, ever thirsty and weary, yet strong in heart and high in
impulse, as our soldiers ever are when face to face with difficulty
or death.

Then a little breeze might catch the sails, carry the boats ahead,
and then a cheer of satisfaction would make the welkin ring.

Incredible was the amount of skill, care, and toil requisite for
getting the boats of the flotilla up the Nile, especially at these
places where with terrible force the rapids came in one sheet of
foam, with a ceaseless roar between narrow walls of black rock at a
visible incline, while at times the yells of thousands of wondering
natives on the banks lent a strange and thrilling interest to the
scene.

'At low Nile,' says a writer, 'these rapids are wild and desolate
archipelagos, usually at least one or two miles in length, while the
river bank on either side presents a series of broken, precipitous,
and often inaccessible cliffs and rugged spurs.  Their sombre and
gloomy appearance is heightened by the colour of the rock, which,
between high and low water-mark, is usually of a jet hue, and in many
places so polished by the long action of the water, that it has the
appearance of being carefully black-leaded.  One or two big-winged,
dusky birds may suddenly flap across, with a harsh, uncanny cry, or
some small boy, whose tailor's bills must trouble him little, looks
up from his fish-trap and shrieks for backsheesh; but beyond these,
and the ceaseless rush of the water, sound or sight there is none.'

Many of these islets are submerged at high Nile, creating a number of
cross currents which vary with the depth of the water, and render
navigation difficult to all, and impossible to those who are
unacquainted with each special locality; thus the troops of the
relieving column had before them such a task as even Britons scarcely
ever encountered before; but the Canadians, under Colonel Kennedy, of
the Ontario Militia; the Indians, under the great chief White Eagle,
and the soldiers, all worked splendidly together.

The 3rd of January saw the Staffordshire reach the Bivouac of Handab,
in a wild and rocky spot, and in a position of peril between two
great bodies of the enemy; but cheerily the soldiers joined in the
queer chorus of a doggerel Canadian boat song adapted to the occasion
by the Indians, who, whilom, had made the poplar groves of the Red
River and Lake Winnipeg echo to it--

  'Pulley up the boat, boys, rolley up the sleeve,
  Khartoum am a long way to trabbel!
  Pulley up the boat, boys, rolley up the sleeve,
  Khartoum am a long way to trabbel, I believe!'




CHAPTER LI.

THE MARCH IN THE DESERT.

We have stated that Roland and his comrades were left stationed at a
point where they were menaced by two forces of the enemy.

'These were,' says Colonel Eyre, of the Staffordshire, in his
'Diary,' 'the tribes whose people murdered poor Colonel Stewart.
They are entrenched twenty-three miles in front of us up the river,
and sent word that they were to fight.  They have a large force on
the Berber Road, forty miles on our flank; they were here two days
ago, and took all the camels in the district.  We are encamped on a
wild desert, with ridges of rocky hills about two miles inland.  We
have pitched our tents.'

There we shall leave them for a time, and look back to Korti, where
some boats of troops arrived from Hannek, twenty-three miles lower
down the Nile, and in one of these, tugging manfully at an oar, came
the rescued Malcolm Skene!

His disappearance many weeks before--nearly three months now--was
well known to the troops; hence--though in that fierce warfare, a
human life, more or less lost or saved, mattered little--his sudden
appearance in camp, when he reported himself at the headquarter tent,
did make a little stir for a time; and thus he was the hero of the
hour; but great and forward movements were in progress now, and there
was not much time to waste on anyone or anything else.

Though he had missed his corps, the Staffordshire, by about
twenty-four hours, it was with a source of intense satisfaction that
he found himself among his own countrymen again--once more with the
troops and ready for active service of any kind.

One thought was fully prominent in his mind, never again would he be
taken alive by the Soudanese.

A horse, harness, and arms, belonging to some of the killed or
drowned, were speedily provided for him, and, by order of the General
commanding, he was attached to the personal staff--_pro tem._--of Sir
Herbert Stewart, as his great knowledge of the country and of Arabic
might prove of good service.

Considering the treachery of Hassan Abdullah, his long detention in
the zereba of the Sheikh Moussa, and what his too probable end would
have been after the deportation of Zebehr Pasha, with the recent
close and deadly struggle he had for life in the grasp of Girolamo,
and how nearly he escaped recapture and slaughter, Malcolm Skene had
now a personal and somewhat rancorous animosity to the Soudanese.

Now that he had not perished in the desert, in the river, by Arab
hands, or in any fashion as his troublesome presentiment had led him
to expect when he left Cairo guided by that rascal Hassan on his
lonely mission to Dayr-el-Syrian, he felt a curious sense of
mortification, compunction, almost of regret, concerning the very
tender and loving letter of farewell he had written to Hester Maule;
and began to think it would be somewhat remarkable and awkward
if--after all--he should again meet her face to face in society.

Then again, as often before, he seemed to see in fancy the
conservatory at Earlshaugh, with its long and faintly lit vistas of
flowers, rare exotics, with feathery acacias and orange trees and
azaleas overhead; the gleam of the moonshine on the adjacent lakelet;
the tall slender figure and soft dark eyes of Hester; and to his
vivid imagination her words and his own came back to him, with the
nervous expression of her sad and parted lips as she forbade him ever
to hope, and yet gave him no reason why!

How long, long ago, it seemed since then!  Yet he often fancied
himself saying to her:

'Is the answer you gave me then still the same, dear Hester?'

Well--well--that was over and done with, as yet, and ere dawn came in
on the 29th of December he was roused by the bugles sounding 'the
assembly' for the advance.

Lord Wolseley's orders were now that General Earle, with an Infantry
Brigade (including the Black Watch and Staffordshire), was to punish
the Monassir tribe for the murder of Colonel Donald Stewart; while
the Mounted Infantry and Guards Camel Corps, under Sir Herbert
Stewart, were to advance on a march of exploration to Gakdul, a
distance of ninety miles, with a convoy of camels laden with
stores--a route between the deserts of Bayuda and Ababdeh.

A little after 3 a.m. on the 29th of December, the cavalry scouts,
under Major Kitchener, with some Arab guides, moved off, and then
Lord Wolseley gave his orders for the column to get into motion, and
strike straight off across the pebble-strewn desert, towards the
distant horizon, which was indicated only by a dark, opaque, and
undulating line, against which a mimosa tuft stood up, and above
which the rays of the yet unrisen sun were faintly crimsoning the
then hazy sky, which otherwise as yet was totally dark.

To Sir Herbert Stewart the final orders were brought by Malcolm
Skene, his new aide-de-camp.

'You are to advance, sir, in column of companies, with an interval of
thirty paces between each, the Guards Camel Corps and Engineers in
front, the convoy and baggage next, then the Artillery and Mounted
Infantry, the Hussars to form the advance and rear guards.'

Malcolm saluted, reined back his horse, and betook him to the
inevitable cigarette, while the camels ceased to grunt, and stalked
off to the posts assigned them, and the column began to move, so as
to be in readiness to form a hollow square at a moment's notice.

To Malcolm Skene, even to him who had recently seen so much, it was
indeed a strange sight to watch the departing camels, with their
long, slender necks stretched out like those of ostriches, and their
legs, four thousand pairs in number, gliding along in military order,
silently, softly, noiselessly, like a mighty column of phantoms,
beast and rider, until the light, rising dust of the desert blended
all, soldiers, camels, convoy, artillery, and baggage, into one gray,
uniform mass, which ere long seemed to fade out, to pass away from
the eyes of those who remained behind in the camp.

In case of an attack the Guards were to form square, echeloned on the
left front of the column; the Mounted Infantry were to do the same on
the right rear; but the column was so great in length that it was
feared their fire would scarcely protect the entire line unless the
usually swift enemy were seen approaching in time to get the baggage
and convoy closed up; for, broad though the front of this strange
column, it was fully a mile long, and would have proved very unwieldy
to handle in case of a sudden onslaught.  Thus on the march it
frequently halted, dismounted, and, for practice, prepared to meet
the enemy, and was so formed that if the latter got among the camels
they would be exposed to an enfilading fire from two faces each way.

After a halt nine miles distant from Korti, and as many to the left
of the Wady Makattem, the march was resumed under a peculiarly
brilliant moonlight--one so bright that few present had ever seen
anything like it before.

Not a cloud was visible in the far expanse of the firmament; there
were millions upon millions of stars sparkling, but their brightness
paled almost out in the brilliance of the moon.  There were no leaves
to shine in the dew, but showers of diamonds seemed to gem the yellow
pebbles of the desert; and had birds been there, they might have sung
as if a new day had dawned; yet how all unlike the warm glow of an
Egyptian day was the icy splendour of the moonlight that mingled in
one quarter with the coming redness of the east.

Every sword-blade, every rifle-barrel, every buckle and stirrup-iron,
glinted out in light, while the figures of every camel and horse,
soldier, and artillery-wheel were clearly defined as at noonday; and
no sound broke the stillness save the shrill voices of the Somali
camel-drivers.

It was soon after this that Major Barrow, when scouting with some
Hussars, came upon a solitary messenger, bearer of a tiny scrap of
paper, no larger than a postage stamp--one of the last missives from
Gordon, dated 14th December, he being then shut up in Khartoum.

The moonlight faded; the red dawn came in, and still the march of the
column went on; in front a dreary, sandy, and waterless desert;
behind, the narrow streak of green that indicated the course of the
Nile; and now our officers began to say to each other that 'if the
camel corps alone was from the first deemed sufficient to relieve
Khartoum, then why, at such enormous expense, exertion, and toil,
were 3,000 infantry brought blundering up the Nile?  And anon, if
they were not sufficient, surely there was infinite danger in
exposing the corps, unsupported, to the contingency of an
overwhelming attack by the united forces of the Mahdi.'

It was found that there were wells, however, at Hamboka, El Howeiyat,
and elsewhere, far apart, and that so far as water was concerned the
practicability of the desert route to Metemneh was proved by the
march to Gakdul; after reaching which Sir Herbert Stewart retraced
his steps to Korti; where two days afterwards, about noon, a cloud of
dust seen rising in the distance, almost to the welkin, announced the
return of his column, looming large and darkly out of the mirage of
the desert, in forms that were strange, distorted, and gigantic,
after leaving twenty broken-down camels to die, abandoned in the
awful waste.

Just as Stewart came, the sound of Scottish pipes on the Nile
announced the arrival of the Black Watch in their boats off Korti.
All round the world have our bagpipes sounded, but never before so
far into the heart of the Dark Continent.

On Thursday, the 8th of January, the second advance through the
desert began, and the natives looked upon the troops as doomed men.
Three armies, larger and better equipped, had departed on the same
errand to 'smash up' the Mahdi, but had been cut off nearly to a man,
and their unburied skeletons were strewn all over the country.

All the officers in Sir Herbert Stewart's column were strangers to
Malcolm Skene, but such is the influence of service together,
_camaraderie_ and companionship in danger and suffering, that even in
these days of general muddle and 'scratch' formations, he felt
already quite like an old friend with the staff and many others.

The pebble-strewn desert was glistening in the moonlight, when the
column _en route_ for Khartoum, _viâ_ Gubat and Metemneh, marched off
at two in the morning, and ever and anon the bugle rang out on the
ambient air, sounding 'halt,' that the stragglers in the rear might
close up, and then the long array continued to glide like a phantom
army, or a mass of moving shadows, across the waste.

Three hours afterwards, there stole upon one quarter of the horizon a
lurid gleam--the herald of the coming day; then the bugles struck up
a Scottish quick-step--the silence was broken, and the men began to
talk cheerily, and 'chaff' each other, though already enduring that
parched sensation in the mouth, peculiar to all who traverse the
deserts that border on the Nile--a parched feeling for which liquor,
curious to say, is almost useless, and often increases the
torture--and all, particularly the marching infantry, in defiance of
orders, drank from their water-bottles surreptitiously, even when it
was announced that seventy more miles had to be covered ere a proper
supply could be obtained from wells.

Those at Hamboka, forty-seven miles from Korti, were found full of
dry sand--destroyed by the horsemen of the Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil,
who was in that quarter; those at El Howieyat, eight miles further
on, were in nearly the same condition, and already the soldiers were
becoming maddened by thirst.

Day had passed, and again the weary march was resumed in the dark.

At the well of Abu Haifa, eighty miles from Korti, the scene that
ensued was exciting and painful--even terrible.  The orders were that
the fighting men were to be first supplied; and, held back by the
bayonet's point, the wretched camp-followers, Somali camel-drivers,
and others frantically tore up the warm sand with their hands in the
hope that a little water might collect therein, and when it did so,
they stooped and lapped it up like thirsty cats or dogs.  Others
failed to achieve this, and with their mouths cracked, their entrails
shrivelled, their flashing eyes wild and hollow, they rolled about
with frenzy at their hearts, and blasphemy on their lips.  There was
no reasoning with them--they could no longer reason.

Even the resolute British soldier could scarcely be restrained by
habitual discipline from throwing the latter aside, and joining in
the throng that surged around the so-called well--a mere stony hole
in the desert sand--while in the background were maddened horses, and
even the ever-patient camels, plunging, struggling, unmanageable, and
fighting desperately with their masters for a drop of that precious
liquid.

In the struggle here Malcolm Skene, as an officer, got his
water-bottle filled among the earliest, having ridden forward, and
with a sigh that was somewhat of a prayer he was about to take a deep
draught therefrom, when the wan face, the haggard eyes, and parched
lips of a young soldier of the 2nd Sussex caught his eye.  Too weak
to struggle, perhaps too well-bred, if breeding could be remembered
in that hour of madness, or so despairing as to be careless, he had
made no effort to procure water, or if he did so, had failed.

Skene's heart smote him.

'Drink, my man,' said he, proffering his water-bottle, 'and then I
shall.'

'Oh, may God bless you, sir,' murmured the poor infantry lad
fervently, as he drank, and returned the bottle with a salute.

Gakdul--hemmed in by lofty and stupendous precipices of bare
rock--was reached on the 12th January, when, amid cheers and
rejoicings, a plentiful supply of water was obtained, after which
preparations were made for the march to Metemneh, where it was known
that thousands were gathering to bar our way to Khartoum.  Yet
Stewart's total strength was only 1,607 men of all ranks, encumbered
by 304 camp followers, and 2,380 camels and horses.  The halt of two
days at Gakdul did wonders in restoring the energies of men and
cattle.

There Malcolm Skene's knowledge of Arabic was frequently in
requisition.  As yet the leaders of this advanced column were utterly
without any trustworthy intelligence as to the movements of the
Mahdi's army, for bands of prowling robbers and the Bedouins of the
Sheikh Moussa infested every route in front and rear, keeping
carefully out of sight by day-time, but swooping down on the camping
grounds by night in the hope of finding abandoned spoil--perhaps sick
or wounded men to torture and slay.

Sir Herbert Stewart arrived on the 16th of January within a few miles
of the now famous wells of Abu Klea, after a waterless march of
forty-three miles from those of El Faar, and already even the poor
camels had become so reduced in physique that as many as thirty
dropped down to die in one day; but the troops reached a line of
black sandstone ridges lying westward of Abu Klea, and a squadron of
Hussars, whose horses were suffering most severely from want of
water, cantered forward to inspect the country, and Malcolm Skene
rode with them.

At mid-day they found the enemy in a valley, where long and reedy
grass was waving in the hot breeze--a place studded by several
camel-thorns and acacias.  The Arab centre occupied a long and gentle
slope, like the glacis of an earthwork.

Led by a Sheikh, about 200 mounted men advanced resolutely and in
tolerable order, opening fire with their Remingtons on the Hussars.

In their leader, Malcolm, through his field-glass, recognised the
Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil, who alone of all his band wore a suit of
that mail armour of the Middle Ages, which is thus described by
Colonel Colborne, who says 'it was in the Soudan' he first saw it, to
his amazement: 'Whether original or a copy of it, it was undoubtedly
the dress of the Crusaders.  The hauberk was fastened round the body
by the belt, and formed a complete covering from head to foot.  The
long and double-edged sword was worn between the leg and saddle.'

Moussa wore a flat-topped helmet with a plume, and tippet of Darfour
mail; his horse's head was cased in steel, and covered by a quilt
thick enough to turn a spear; but, save their bodies, which were clad
in Mahdi shirts, his followers were naked--with their dark,
bronze-like legs and arms bare.

Under their fire the reconnoitring force of Hussars fell back, an
operation viewed by Sir Herbert Stewart and his staff from the summit
of a lofty hill composed entirely of black and shining rock, from
whence he could see the whole country for miles, and from where he
ordered a general advance.

By difficult defiles, and in serious distress owing to the want of
water, the troops advanced in steady and splendid order, the line
being led by the Brigade Major, David, Earl of Airlie, of the 10th
Hussars--one of a grand old historic race--round whose Castle of
Cortachy a spectre drummer is said to beat when fate is nigh--and he
had brought the whole into the valley by half-past two o'clock; then
Sir Herbert, having ascertained from Skene's report that the wells of
Abu Klea were too far in rear of the Arab position to be accessible
that night, resolved to fortify the ground he occupied, a ridge
rising gently from the Wady, but broken before it reached the hills,
while close in rear of it was a grassy hollow, wherein the baggage
animals were picketed.

Hasty parapets of stones, gathered from the ground whereon the troops
lay, were constructed along the front of the position, flanked by
_abattis_ of thorny mimosa, while the great hill of black rock
referred to was occupied by a party of signallers, who built thereon
a redoubt; while a mile in its rear, on the brow of a precipice,
another fortlet was formed as a rallying point in case of a reverse.

With his staff and a few Hussars Sir Herbert now rode to the front,
and saw, as the ruddy sun began to set and cast long shadows over the
swelling uplands of the scenery, the enemy in their thousands taking
possession of a lofty hill sixteen hundred paces distant on his
right--a position from whence they could completely enfilade his
lines.  Thus ere darkness fell they secured the range, and from that
time no one could reckon on twenty minutes' sound sleep.

Prior to that a couple of shells were thrown among them, exploding
with brilliant glares and loud crashes, on which they retired a
little or sank down, leaving two great white banners floating out
against the starry sky-line.

All night long they 'potted' away with their Remingtons, keeping up a
desultory, but most harassing, fire, their long range and trajectory
placing every point in danger, and some of their bullets fell
whizzing downwards through the air upon the sleepers.

Many men were wounded, and many camels, too, and all night long,
while their rifle shots flashed redly out of the darkness, they
maintained a horrible din on their one-headed war drums, making the
hours hideous.

All through the dark and moonless night these savage sounds rose and
swelled upon the dewy air, and formed a fitting accompaniment to the
wail of their pestering bullets as they swept over the silent British
bivouac.




CHAPTER LII.

THE PRESENTIMENT FULFILLED.

So passed the night.

On the morning of the 17th of January, early, and without blast of
bugle or beat of drum, a frugal breakfast--the last meal that many
were to have in this world--was served round, and had been barely
partaken of, when the Arab skirmishers came swarming over the low
hills on our right flank, and opened fire with their Remingtons at
eleven hundred yards' range.

With a succession of dreadful crashes, our shrapnel shell exploded
among them, tearing many to pieces and putting the rest to flight;
and after more than one attempt to lure the enemy from their position
had failed, at 7 a.m. Sir Herbert Stewart began his preparations to
advance, and drive them from the wells of Abu Klea.

Meanwhile the army of the Mahdi had been continually appearing and
disappearing in front, their many-coloured pennons streaming out on
the passing breeze, their long sword-blades and spear-heads flashing
brightly in the red rays of the uprising sun, while the thunder of
their battle-drums and their savage wild cries loaded the morning air.

Five ranks deep, four thousand of them deployed in irregular lines
along a hollow in our front, led by mounted sheikhs and dervishes,
clad in richly-embroidered Mahdi camises, and posted at intervals of
twenty-five yards apart--conspicuous among them Moussa Abu Hagil, in
his Darfour shirt of mail.

They were posted on strong ground westward of the wells, which our
soldiers, sorely athirst, were full of anxiety to reach; and as the
camels were mostly to be left in the rear, they were knee-haltered,
and their stores and saddles used to strengthen the parapets of the
detached fortlets.

In the fighting square which now advanced were only one hundred
camels for carrying litters, stores, water, and spare ammunition.

The Heavies on this eventful morning were led by Colonel Talbot; the
Guards by Colonel Boscawen; the gallant Barrow led the Mounted
Infantry, and Lord Beresford the slender Naval Brigade.

Men were being knocked over now on every hand, and among the first
who fell was Lord St. Vincent, of the 17th Lancers, who received a
wound that proved mortal.  Under Barrow the Mounted Infantry went
darting forward, and the Arab skirmishers fell back before them,
vanishing into the long wavy grass from amid which the smoke of their
rifles spirted up.  Skene had the spike of his helmet carried away by
one ball; his bridle hand sharply grazed by another, but he bound his
handkerchief about the wound and rode on.

By this time nearly an hour had elapsed since the zereba and its
fortlets had been left in the rear, and only two miles of ground had
been covered, and all the while our troops had been under a fire from
the sable warriors on the hill slopes.

'Halt!' was now sounded by the bugles, and the faces of the square
were redressed and post was to be taken on a slope, which the enemy
would have to ascend when attacking.

Their total strength was now estimated at 14,000 men!

Our dead men were left where they fell; but frequent were the halts
for picking up the wounded.  Yet steady as if on parade in a home
barrack square, our little band advanced, over stony crests, through
dry water-courses, like some hugh machine, compact and slow, firm and
regular, amid the storm of bullets poured into it from the front,
from the flanks, and eventually from the rear.

At first the enemy swarmed in dark masses all along our front, and
for two or three miles on either flank groups of their horsemen, with
floating garments and glittering spears, could be seen watching the
advance of the hollow square from black peaks of splintered rock.
'There was no avenue of retreat now for us,' wrote one, 'and no one
thought of such a thing.  "Let us do or die!" (in the words of
Bruce's war song) was the emotion of all; and Colonel Barrow, C.B.,
with his "handful" of Hussars, became engaged about the same time as
the square.'

He maintained a carbine fire, while General Stewart, with his
personal staff, including Major Wardrop, the Earl of Airlie, and
Captains Skene and Rhodes, galloped from point to point, keeping all
in readiness to repulse a sudden charge; but, with all their bravery,
it was a trial for our Heavy Dragoons to march on foot and fight with
infantry rifles and bayonets--weapons to which they were totally
unaccustomed.

The keen, yet dreamy sense of imminent peril--the chances of sudden
death, with the spasmodic tightness of the chest that emotion
sometimes causes, had passed from Malcolm Skene now completely; he
'felt cool as a cucumber,' yet instinct with the fierce desire to
close with, to grapple, and to spur among the enemy _sabre à la
main_; and he forgot even the smarting of his wounded bridle hand as
the troops moved onward.

A few minutes after ten o'clock, when the leading face of the square
had won the crest of a gentle slope on the other side of a hollow, a
column of the enemy, about 5,000 strong, was seen echeloned in two
long lines on the left, or opposite that face which was formed by the
mounted infantry and heavy cavalry, and looking as if they meant to
come on now.

They were still marshalled, as stated, by sheikhs and dervishes on
horseback, and, with all their banners rustling in the wind, the
battle-drums thundering, and their shrill cries of 'Allah!  Allah!'
loading the air, they advanced quickly, brandishing their flashing
spears and two-handed swords.  Abu Saleh, Ameer of Metemneh, led the
right; Moussa Abu Hagil led the centre; and Mahommed Khuz, Ameer of
Berber, who had soon to retire wounded, led the left, and our
skirmishers came racing towards the square.

Strange to say, our fire as yet seemed to have little effect upon the
foe; very few were falling, and the untouched began to believe that
the spells of Osman Digna and the promises of the Mahdi had rendered
their bodies shot-proof; and when within three hundred yards of the
square they began to rush over the undulating ground like a vast wave
of black surf.  Now the Gardner gun was brought into action; but when
most required, and at a moment full of peril, the wretched Government
ammunition failed to act--the cartridges stuck ere the third round
was fired; the human waves of Arabs came rolling down upon the
square, leaping and yelling over their dead and wounded, never
reeling nor wavering under the close sheets of lead that tore through
them now.

Like fiends let loose they came surging and swooping on, their
burnished weapons flashing, and their black brawny forms standing
boldly out in the glow of the sunshine, unchecked by the hailstorm of
bullets, spearing the horsemen around the useless Gardner gun, and
fighting hand to hand, Abu Saleh and the Sheikh Moussa leading them
on, and then it was that the gallant Colonel Burnaby, of the Blues,
fell like the hero he was.

The wild and high desire to do something that might win him a name,
and make, perhaps, Hester Maule proud of him, welled up in the heart
of Malcolm Skene, even at that terrible crisis, and he spurred his
horse forward a few paces, just as Burnaby had done, to succour some
of the skirmishers, who, borne back by the Arab charge, had failed to
reach the protection of the square, which was formed in the grand old
British fashion, shoulder to shoulder like a living wall.

By one trenchant, back-handed stroke of his sword, he nearly swept
the head off the yelling Arab, thereby saving from the latter's spear
a Foot Guardsman, who had stumbled ere he could reach the square; but
now Skene was furiously charged by another, who bore the standard of
Sheikh Moussa.

Grasping his spear by his bridle hand, he ran his sword fairly
through the Arab, who fell backward in a heap over his horse's
crupper, and then Skene tore from his dying grip the banner, which
was of green silk--the holy colour--edged with red, and bore a verse
of the Koran in gold (for it was a gift from the Mahdi), and,
regaining the shelter of the square, threw his trophy at the foot of
the General.

'This shall go to the Queen--in your name, Captain Skene!' said the
latter.

'The Queen--no, sir--but to a girl in Scotland, I hope, whether I
live or not!' replied Malcolm.

It was sent to the Queen at Windsor eventually, however, for Malcolm,
now, when the square, recoiling before the dreadful rush, had receded
about a hundred yards, and the Arabs were charging our men breast
high, and the Heavies, instead of remaining steady as infantry would
have done, true to their cavalry instincts were springing forward to
close with the foe, once more dashed to the front in headlong
fashion, and found himself beyond the face of the square, opposed to
a tribe of Ghazis, who were brandishing their spears, hurling
javelins, and hewing right and left with their two-handed swords--all
swarthy negroes from Kordofan, and copper-coloured Arabs of the
Bayuda Desert with long, straight, floating hair.

Heedless of death--nay, rather courting it as the path to
paradise--with weapons levelled or uplifted, they came forward, with
blood pouring from their bullet wounds in many instances, some
staggering under these till they dropped and died within five paces
of the square, while the others rushed on, and the fight became hand
to hand, the bayonet meeting the Arab spear.  On our side there was
not much shouting as yet, only a brief cry, an oath, or a short
exclamation of prayer or agony as a soldier fell down in his place,
and all the valour of the Heavies became unavailing, when their
formation was broken, when the foe mingled with them, and they were
driven back upon the Naval Brigade, with its still useless Gardner
gun, upon the right of the Sussex Regiment, which strove to close up
the gap.

Then it was that Skene found himself opposed to Moussa Abu Hagil,
whose horse had been shot under him, and who, half-blinded by his own
blood streaming from a bullet-wound from which his Darfour helmet
failed to save him, fought like a wild animal, slashing about with
his double-edged sword, which broke in his hand, and then using his
spear.

Dashing at Skene with a demoniac yell, he levelled the long blade of
the weapon at his throat.  Parrying the thrust by a circular sweep of
his sword, Skene checked his horse and reined it backwards; but the
length of Skeikh Moussa's spear, nearly ten feet, put it out of his
power to return with proper interest the fury of the attack.  Twice
at least his sword touched the Arab, thus making him, if more wary,
all the more eager and fierce, and there was a grim and defiant smile
on Skene's face as he fenced with Moussa and parried his thrusts; but
now he was attacked by others when scarcely his horse's length from
the face of the square.

One wounded him in the right shoulder; Skene turned in his saddle and
clove him down.  At that moment a soldier--the young lad of the 2nd
Sussex to whom he gave his water-bottle at the well of Abu Haifa--ran
from the ranks and attacked another assailant of Skene, but perished
under twenty spears, and ere the latter could deliver one blow again,
he was dragged from his saddle, covered with wounds in the neck and
face--ghastly wounds from which the blood was streaming--'each a
death to nature,' and literally hewn to pieces.

So thus, eventually, was his strange presentiment fulfilled!

Meanwhile the Ghazis had forced their way so far into the square that
one was actually slain in the act of firing the battery ammunition.
Despite the great efforts of a gallant Captain Verner and others,
'the Heavies were being massacred; and after the fall of Burnaby,
whom Sir William Cumming, of the Scots Guards, tried to save, Verner
was beaten down, but his life (it is recorded) was saved by Major
Carmichael, of the Irish Lancers, whose dead body fell across him, as
well as those of three Ghazis.'

The Earl of Airlie and Lord Beresford, fighting sword in hand, were
both wounded, and so furious was the inrush of the Arabs, that many
of them reached the heart of the square, where they slew the maimed
and dying in the litters, and rushed hither and thither, with shrill
yells, streaming hair, and flashing eyes, until they were all shot
down or bayoneted to death.

Fighting for life and vengeance, and half maddened to find that their
cartridges jammed hard and fast after the third shot, our
soldiers--in some instances placed back to back--fought on the summit
of a mound surrounded by thousands upon thousands of dark-skinned
spearmen and swordsmen, hurling their strength on what were
originally the left and rear faces of the square, till, with all its
defects, our fire became so deadly and withering, that they began to
waver, recoil, and eventually fly, while the triumphant cheers of our
men rent the welkin.

Away went the Arabs streaming in full flight towards Berber,
Metemneh, and the road to Khartoum, followed by Barrow and his
Hussars cutting them down like ripened grain, and followed, to the
screaming, plunging, and crashing fire of the screw guns which now
came into action and pursuit with shot and shell.

So the field and the walls of Abu Klea were won, but dearly, as we
had 135 other ranks killed, and above 200 wounded, including camel
drivers and other camp followers.

The former were buried by the men of the 19th Hussars.  Earth to
earth--dust to dust--ashes to ashes; three carbine volleys rang above
them in farewell, and all was over; while the native slain were left
in their thousands to the birds of the air.

The column reached the city of Abu Klea in the evening, and then,
parched and choked with thirst after the heat and toil and fierce
excitement of the past night and day, all enjoyed the supreme luxury
of the cold water from the fifty springs or more that bubbled in the
Wady.  Round these, men, horses, and camels gathered to quench their
thirst, that amounted to agony, by deep and repeated draughts, while
fires were lighted and a meal prepared.

Next followed the battle of Gubat and the futile expedition of Sir
Charles Wilson, both of which are somewhat apart from our story.

The death of Colonel Burnaby, of the Blues, created a profound
sensation in London society, where he was a great favourite; but
there were many more than he to sorrow for.

Skene's fall made a deep impression among the Staffordshire, as he
was greatly beloved by the soldiers.

'Poor Malcolm--killed at last!' said Roland, when the tidings came up
the river to the bivouac at Hamdab.  He should never see his brown,
dark eyes again; feel the firm clasp of his friendly hand, or hear
his cheery voice say--'Well, Roland--old fellow!'

'But it may be my turn next,' thought he.

'Poor Malcolm!' said Jack Elliot; 'I have known him nurse the sick,
bury the dead, sit for hours playing with a soldier's ailing child,
and once he swam a mile and more to save a poor dog from drowning.

And as he spoke, sometimes a tearless sob shook Elliot's sturdy
frame, and Roland knew that with his friend Malcolm

  'All was ended now--the hope, the fear, and the sorrow;
  All the aching of the heart, the restless, unsatisfied longing;
  All the dull, deep pain and constant anguish of patience--
  His love and his life had ended together!'




CHAPTER LIII

A HOMEWARD GLANCE.

The action of one human being on another, by subtle means, it has
been said, is as effective as the action of light on the air: that
under the influence of Hawkey Sharpe and certain new circumstances,
Annot Drummond had visibly deteriorated already.

Her high-flown ideas and undoubtedly better breeding had caused her
to experience many a shock when in the daily and hourly society of
her husband, with all his vulgar and horsey ways, and he was
certainly far below that young lady's high-pitched expectations and
her love of externals.

Her life at Earlshaugh had at first been getting quite like a story,
she thought, and a perplexingly interesting story, too, with the high
game she had to play for--a game in manoeuvres worthy of Machiavelli
himself.

Annot, we know, was not tall; but her slight figure was prettily
rounded.  She carried herself well, though too quick and impulsive in
her movements for real dignity, and as Maude had said, she never
could conceive her at the head of a household, or taking a place in
society.  Now, as the wife of 'a cad' like Hawkey Sharpe, the latter
was not to be thought of.

Her pretty ways and glittering golden hair, which had misled better
men than the wretched Sharpe, were palling even upon him, now; and
her studied artlessness had given place to a bearing born of vanity
and her own success and ambition, the sequel of which she was yet to
learn, but withal she was not yet lady of Earlshaugh.  But, as a
writer says of a similar character, 'a self-love, that demon who
besets alike the learned philosopher with his own pet theories; the
statesman with his pet political hobbies; the man of wealth with his
own aggrandisement; and the man of toil with his own pet
prejudices--that insidious demon had entire hold now of this silly
little girl's heart, and closed it to anything higher.'

Married now, and safe in position as she thought herself, Annot was
no longer the coaxing and cooing little creature she had been to
Hawkey Sharpe; and rough and selfish though he was, a flash of her
eyes, or a curl of her lip cowed him at times.  She treated him as
one for whom she was bound to entertain a certain amount of marital
affection, but no respect whatever, and when she contrasted him with
Roland Lindsay and other men she had known, even poor, weak Bob
Hoyle, her manner became one of contempt and, occasionally, disgust.

But she had preferred the _couleur d'or_ to the _couleur de rose_ in
matrimony, and had now, as Hawkey said, 'to ride the ford as she
found it.'

'Men like Roland,' said Annot to Mrs. Lindsay when discussing her
whilom lover, 'especially military men, see a good deal of life, and
experience teaches them how passing a love affair may be.'

'You mean----' began Mrs. Lindsay, scarcely knowing what to say.

'I mean that he must have played with fire pretty often,' said Annot,
laughing, but not pleasantly, 'and will forget me as he must have
forgotten others.  I suppose our likes and dislikes in this world are
based upon the point that somebody likes or dislikes ourselves.'

Hawkey Sharpe's debts and demands since his marriage had exhausted
the patience if not quite the finances of his sister: and now the
bill, erewhile referred to--the racing debt--was falling inexorably
due, and how to meet it, or be stigmatised as a 'welsher' on every
course in the country, became a source of some anxiety to that
gentleman.

To meet his other requirements, all the fine timber in the King's
Wood was gone--a clean sweep had been made from King James's Thorn to
the Joug Tree, that bears an iron collar, in which for centuries the
offenders on the domains of Earlshaugh had suffered durance, and the
once finely foliaged hill now looked bare and strange; and for angry
remarks thereat, Willie Wardlaw, the gardener, and Gavin Fowler, the
head gamekeeper, aged dependants on the house of Earlshaugh, as their
fathers had been before them, had been summarily dismissed by Mr.
Hawkey Sharpe.

A well-known firm of shipbuilders on the Clyde had offered for the
wood, and to the former the most attractive part of the transaction,
in addition to the good price, was the fact that the money was paid
down at once but it was far from satisfying the wants of Mr. Hawkey
Sharpe.

'You know I disliked having that timber sold--that I hated the mere
thought of having it cut!' said Deborah to him reproachfully, as she
looked from the window into the sunshine.

'Why?' he asked sulkily; 'what the devil was the use of it?'

'It was the favourite feature in the landscape----'

'Of whom?'

'My dead husband.'

'Bosh!' exclaimed Hawkey, who thought this was (what, to do her
justice, it was not) 'twaddle.'

They were together in his sanctum, or 'den,' which passed
occasionally as his office; though the table, like the mantelpiece,
was strewed with pipes, their ashes were everywhere, and the air was
generally redolent of somewhat coarse tobacco smoke.

Having a favour to ask, he had, in his own fashion, been screwing his
courage to the sticking-point.

'You have been imbibing--drinking again?' said his pale sister,
eyeing him contemptuously with her cold, glittering stare.

'"I take a little wine for my stomach's sake and other infirmities,"
as we find in 1st Timothy,' said he with a twinkle in his shifty eyes.

'The devil can quote Scripture, so well may you.'

'That is severe, Deb,' said he, filling his pipe.

'Come to the point.'

'Well, Deb, dear, would it be convenient to you to--to lend me a
couple of thousand pounds for a few weeks?  I have hinted of this
from time to time.'

'Two thousand pounds!  Not only inconvenient, but impossible,' said
she, twisting her rings about in nervous anger.

'Why, Deb?'

'I have not even a fifty-pound note in the house.'

'But plenty lying idle at your banker's.'

'Not the sum you seek to borrow just now.  Borrow!  Why not be
candid, and ask for it out and out?  Two thousand----'

'I must have the money, I tell you,' he said, with sudden temper,
'or--or----'

'What?'

'Be disgraced--that is all,' he replied, sullenly lighting his huge
briar-root.

'Well, you must find it without my aid,' said she, coldly and
sullenly too.

'Could you not raise it on some of your useless jewels?  Come, now,
dear old Deb, don't be too hard upon a fellow.'

Anger made her pale cheek suffuse at this cool suggestion, and she
became very much agitated.

'Now, don't cut up this way.  It is your heart again, of course; but
keep quiet, and let nothing trouble you,' said he, puffing
vigorously.  'You have a lot of the Lindsay jewels that are too
old-fashioned for even you to wear.'

'But not to bequeath.'

'To Annot?' said he, brightening a little.

'I am sick of you and your Annot,' exclaimed Mrs. Lindsay, now all
aflame with anger, and trembling violently.

'Sorry to hear it,' said he, somewhat mockingly.  'We have not yet
quite got over our spooning.'

'Don't use that horrid, vulgar phrase, Hawkey.'

'Vulgar!  How?'

'One no doubt derived from the gipsies, when two used one horn spoon.
Annot, with all her apparent amiable imbecility, is a remarkably
acute young woman.'

'She is--and does credit to my taste, Deb.'

'One whom it is impossible to dislike, I admit.'

'Of course.'

'And also quite impossible to love.'

'Oh, come now, poor Annot!' said Hawkey, with a kind of mock
deprecation; and then to gain favour he said, 'I do wish, dear Deb,
that you would see the doctor again--about yourself.'

'I have seen him; the old story, he can do nothing but order me to
avoid all agitation, yet you have not given me much chance of that
lately.'

'But just once again, Deb--about this money----'

'Another word on the subject and we part for ever!' she exclaimed,
and giving him a glance--stony as the stare of Medusa--one such as he
had never before seen in her small, keen, and steely-gray eyes, she
flung away and left him.

He gnashed his teeth, smashed his pipe on the floor, then lit a huge
regalia to soothe his susceptibilities, and thought about _how_ the
money was to be raised.  He knew his sister had thousands idle in the
bank, and have it he should at all hazards!

He had meant, too, if successful, and he found her pliable, to have
spoken to her again about making her will; but certainly the present
did not seem a favourable occasion to do so.

'Deb will be getting her palpitation of the heart, nervous attacks,
low spirits, and the devil only knows all what more, on the head of
this!' he muttered with a malediction.

Hawkey had watched her retire through the deep old doorway (under the
lintel of which tall Cardinal Beatoun had whilom stooped his head)
and disappear along the stately corridor beyond.  Then he dropped
into an easy-chair--stirred the fire restlessly and impatiently, and
drained his glass, only to refill it--his face the while fraught with
rage and mischief.

He drew a letter or two from a drawer--they were from his sister--and
he proceeded to study her signature with much artistic acumen and
curiosity.

'Needs must when the devil drives!' said he, grinding his teeth and
biting his spiky nails; 'I have done it--and that she'll know in
time!'

Done what?

That the reader will know in time too.




CHAPTER LIV.

THE LONG-SUSPENDED SWORD.

Sorrow is said to make people sometimes, to a certain extent,
selfish; thus sorrow in her own little secluded home was, ere long,
to render Hester, for a space at least, less thoughtful of the grief
which affected her cousin Maude.

Hester was somewhat changed, and knew within herself that it was so.

She found that her daily thoughts ran more anxiously and tenderly
upon her father, and about his fast-failing health, than on any other
subject now.

She lost even a naturally feminine interest in her own beauty.  Who
was there to care for it? she thought.

So on Sundays she sat in her pew, in the kirk on the wooded hill, and
there listened to the preacher's voice blending with the rustle of
the trees and the cawing of the rooks in the ruined fane close by;
but with an emotion in her heart never known before--that of feeling
that ere long she would have a greater need of some one to lean
on--of something to cling to in the coming loneliness that her heart
foreboded to be near now.

At last there came a day she was never to forget--a day that told her
desolation was at hand.

Seated in his Singapore chair at breakfast one morning, her father
suddenly grew deadly pale; a spasm convulsed his features; his
coffee-cup fell from his nerveless hand; and he gazed at her with all
the terror and anguish in his eyes which he saw in her own.

'Papa--papa!' she exclaimed, and sprang to his side.  He gazed at her
wildly, vacantly, and muttered something about 'the Jhansi bullet.'
Then she heard him distinctly articulate her name.

'Hester--my own darling--you here?' he said, with an effort; 'how
sweet you look in that white robe.  I always loved you in it, dear.'

'My dress is rose-coloured--a morning wrapper, papa,' said Hester, as
the little hope that gathered in her heart passed away.

'So white--so pure--just like your marriage-dress, Hester!  But you
wore it the first day I saw you, long ago--long ago--at Earlshaugh,
when you stood in the Red Drawing-room--and gave me a bouquet of
violets from your breast.  My own Hester!'

'Oh, papa--papa!' moaned the poor girl in dire distress, for she knew
he spoke not of her but of her mother, who had reposed for years
under the trees in the old kirkyard on the hill; and a choking sob of
dismay escaped her.

It was a stroke of paralysis that had fallen upon the Indian veteran,
and he was borne to his bed, which he never left alive.

Hour after hour did Maude hang over him, listening to his fevered
breathing, and futile moanings, which no medical skill could repress
or soothe; and the long day, and the terrible night--every minute
seemed an age--passed on, and still the pallid girl watched there in
the hopeless agony of looking for death and not for life.

That long night--one of the earliest of winter--was at last on its
way towards morning.

All was still in the glen of the Esk save the murmur of the mountain
stream and the rustle of the leaves in the shrubberies without, and
there was a strange loneliness, a solemnity, in Hester's mind as she
thought of Merlwood in its solitariness, with death and life, time
and eternity, so nigh each other under its roof; and the ceaseless
ticking of an antique clock in the hall fell like strokes of thunder
on her brain, till she stopped it, lest the sound might disturb the
invalid.

And in that time of supreme anxiety and sorrow the lonely girl
thought of her only kinsman, Roland Lindsay--the friend of her
childhood and early girlhood--the merry, handsome, dark-haired
fellow, who taught her to ride and row and fish, and whom she loved
still with a soft yet passionate affection, that was strong as in the
old days, for all that had come and gone between them.

Would he ever return--return to her and be as he had been
before--before Annot Drummond came?

Another and a fatal stroke came speedily and mercifully; the
long-suspended sword had fallen at last, and the old soldier was
summoned to his last home!


A few days after saw Hester prostrate in her own bed and in the hands
of the doctors, her rich dark-brown hair shorn short from her
throbbing temples, feverish and faint, with dim eyes and pallid lips
that murmured unconsciously of past times, of the distant and the
dead--of her parents, of camps and cantonments far away; of little
brothers and sisters who were in heaven; of green meadows, of garden
flowers and summer evenings, when she and Roland had rambled
together; and then of Egypt and the war in the deserts by the Nile.

After a time, when the early days of February came, when the
mellow-voiced merle and the speckle-breasted mavis were heard in the
woods by the Esk; when the silver-edged gowans starred the grassy
banks, and the newly-dug earth gave forth a refreshing odour, and
everywhere there were pleasant and hopeful signs that the dreary
reign of winter was nearly over, Hester became conscious of her
surroundings, but at first only partially so.

'Maude,' said she, in a weak voice to a watcher, 'dear Maude--are you
there?'

'Yes,' replied the cousin, drawing the sick girl's head upon her
bosom.  'Oh, Hester--my poor darling, how ill you have been!'

'Ill--I ill?  I thought it was papa,' she said, with dilated eyes.
'Is he well now?'

'Yes,' replied Maude, in a choking voice, 'well--very well; but drink
this, dearest.'

'Where is papa--can I see him?  Will you or the doctor take me to
him?'

'He is not here,' began the perplexed Maude.

'Not here; where then?'

'You must wait, Hester, till you are well and strong--well and
strong; you must not speak or think--but eat.'

Then a feeble smile that made Maude's tender heart ache stole over
Hester's pale face.

'Where _is_ papa?' the latter exclaimed suddenly, with a shrill ring
of hysterics in her voice.  'Ah--I know--I remember now,' she added,
with a smile, 'he is dead--dead!'

'Born again, rather say, my darling,' whispered poor Maude, choked
with tears, as she nestled Hester's face in her neck.

'Dead--dead; and I am alone in the world!' moaned Hester, as a hot
shower of tears relieved her, and she turned her face to the wall,
while convulsive sobs shook her shoulders.

In time she was able to leave her bed--to feel herself well, if
weak--deplorably weak, and knew that she had resolutely and
inexorably to face the world of life.

A pile of letters occupied her, luckily, for a time--letters that
were sad if soothing--all full of sympathy, tenderness, and sincere
regret, profound esteem, and so forth, for the brave old man who was
gone; even there was one from Annot, but none from Roland or Jack.

Where were they?  Far away, alas! where postal arrangements were
vague and most uncertain.

We have said that Hester had the world to face.  Her father's pay and
pension died with him, and suddenly the girl was all but penniless.
Her father had been unable to put away any money for her.  People
thought he might and ought to have managed better; but so it was.

Sir Henry's Indian relics, his treasured household gods, such as the
tulwar of the Amazonian Ranee of Jhansi, who fought and died as a
trooper when Tantia Topee strove to save the lost cause, all of which
had to Hester a halo of love and superstition of the heart about
them, were brought to the auctioneer's hammer inexorably, and with
the money realised therefrom she thought to look about for some such
situation or employment as might become one in her unfortunate
position.

As the relics went, her conscience smote her now, for the
recollection of how often she had grown weary over the oft repeated
Indian reminiscences of the poor old man, who lived in the past quite
as much, if not more, than in the present.  What would she not give
to hear his voice once again!  And she remembered now how fond he was
of quoting the words of 'The Ancient Brahmin':

'Happy is he who endeth the business of his life before his death....
Avoid not death, for it is a weakness; fear it not, for thou
understandest not what it is; all thou certainly knowest is, that it
putteth an end to thy sorrows.  Think not the longest life the
happiest; that which is best employed doth the man most honour, and
himself shall rejoice after death in the advantages of it.'

Like other girls who are imaginative and impressionable, she had
built her _châteaux en Espagne_, innocent edifices enough, and
romantic too, but now they had crumbled away, leaving not one stone
upon another.  Her future seemed fixed irrevocably; no idle dreams
could be there, but a life that would, too probably, be blank and
dreary even unto the end.

We cannot be in the world and grieve at all times; but yet one may
feel a sorrow for ever.

'I shall go and earn my living, Maude--be a governess, or something,'
she said, as her plans began to mature.  'It cannot be difficult to
teach little children; though I always hated my own lessons, I know,
even when helped by--Roland.'

'Nonsense, Hester!' exclaimed Maude; 'you shall live with me and--and
Jack, if he ever returns, and all is well.  You are too pretty to be
a governess; no wise matron would have you.'

'Why?'

'Because all the grown sons and brothers would be falling in love
with you.  So you must stay with me.'

But Hester was resolute.

To the many letters of the former--letters agonising in
tenor--addressed to Jack Elliot and to her brother Roland, no answer
ever came, while weeks became months; for many difficulties just then
attended the correspondence of the troops that were on the arduous
expedition for the relief of Khartoum.

Thus, amid all the sorrows of Hester, how keen and great was the
anxiety of Maude!

Jack, her husband--if he _was_ her husband--was now face to face with
the enemy--those terrible Soudanese--and might perish in the field,
by drowning, or by fever, before she could ever have elucidated the
mystery, the cloud, the horrible barrier that had come between them.

At times the emotions that shook the tender form of Maude were
terrible, since the night of that woman's visit, when the iron seemed
to enter her soul; and there descended upon her a darkness through
which there had come no gleam of light.

The past and the future seemed all absorbed in the blank misery of
the present, and as if her life was to be one career of abiding
shame, emptiness, and misery, as a dishonoured wife--if wife she was
at all!

Hawkey Sharpe had inflicted the revengeful blow; the woman, his
degraded tool, had disappeared, and her story remained undisproved as
yet.  Jack, as we have said, might perish in Egypt, and the truth or
the falsehood of that odious story would then be buried in his grave!

The pretty villa near the Grange Loan--the wood-shaded Loan that led
of old to St. Giles's Grange--she now went near no more; it was
torture to go back there--her home it never could be.  Turn which way
she would, her haggard eyes rested on some reminder of Jack's love or
his presence there--their mutual household Lares: her piano, Jack's
carefully selected gift; the music on the stand, chosen by him, and
with his name and 'love' inscribed to her, just as she had left it;
books, statuettes--pretty nothings, alas!

Her mind now pointed to no definite course; she felt like a
rudderless ship drifting through dark and stormy waters before a
cruel blast; in all, her being there was no distinct resolution as
yet what to do or whither to turn.

Yet, calm as she seemed outwardly, there was in her tortured heart a
passionate longing for peace, and peace meant, perhaps, death!

And all this undeserved agony was but the result of a most artful but
pitiful and vulgar vengeance!

Whether born of thoughts caused by recent stirring news from the seat
of war, we know not; but one night Hester woke from a dream of
Roland--after a feverish and sleep-haunted doze--haunted as if by the
spiritual presence of one who--bodily, at least--was far away.

Waking with a start, she heard a familiar and firm step upon the
staircase, and then a door opened--the door of that room which Roland
had always occupied when at Merlwood.

'Roland--Roland!' she cried in terror, and then roused Maude.

There was, of course, no response, but a sound seemed to pass into
that identical room; she fancied she heard steps--his familiar steps
moving about, but as if he trod softly--cautiously.

Terror seized her, and her heart seemed to die within her breast.

She sprang from bed, clasped Maude's hand, and went softly,
mechanically to the room.  It was empty, and the cold light of the
waning moon flooded it from end to end, making it seem alike lone and
ghostly.

Her imagination had played her false; but she was painfully haunted
by the memory of that dream and the palpable sounds that, after
waking, had followed it; and hourly, in her true spirit of Scottish
superstition, expected to hear of fatal tidings from the seat of
war--like her who, of old, had watched by the Weird Yett of
Earlshaugh.

Like poor Malcolm Skene was she, too, to have her presentiment--her
prevision of sorrow to come?

It almost seemed so.

But her thoughts now clung persistently to the hero of her girlish
days; he had behaved faithlessly, uncertainly to her, she thought;
yet, perhaps, he might come back to her some day, if God spared him,
and then he would find the old and tender love awaiting him still.

Yet Roland might come home and marry _someone else_!  No man, she had
heard, went through life remembering and regretting one woman for
ever.  Was it indeed so?

But after the night of her strange dream the morning papers contained
the brief, yet terrible, telegram stating that a battle had been
fought at a place called Kirbekan, by General Earle's column (of
which the Staffordshire formed a part), but that no details thereof
had come to hand.

The recent calamity she had undergone rendered Hester's heart
apprehensive that she might soon have to undergo another.

And ere the lengthened news of the battle did come, she and Maude had
left Edinburgh, as they anticipated, perhaps for ever.




CHAPTER LV.

WITH GENERAL EARLE's COLUMN.

While the column of Brigadier Sir Herbert Stewart was toiling amid
thirst and other sufferings across the vast waste of the Bayuda
Desert, and gaining the well-fought battles of Abu Klea and Abu Kru,
the column of Brigadier Earle had gone by boats up the Nile to avenge
the cruel assassination of Gordon's comrade and coadjutor, Colonel
Donald Stewart, on Suliman Wad Gamr and the somewhat ubiquitous
Moussa Abu Hagil with all their people.

The succession of cataracts rendered the General's progress very
slow; thus the 4th of January found his advanced force, the gallant
South Staffordshire, only encamped at Hamdab, as we have stated a few
chapters back.

Suliman, on being joined by Moussa a few days after Abu Klea, had
fallen back from Berti, thus rendering it necessary for General Earle
to push on in pursuit, through a rocky, broken, and savage country,
bad for all military operations, and altogether impracticable for
cavalry.

On the river the Rahami cataract proved one of great danger and
difficulty, and severe indeed was the labour of getting up the boats.
There the bed of Old Nile is broken up by black and splintered rocks,
between which it rushes in snowy foam with mighty force and volume.

The boats had to be tracked up the entire distance, often with many
sharp turns to avoid sunken rocks in the chasms; and, as a large
number of men were required for each boat, the column, comprising the
Staffordshire, the Black Watch, a squadron of Hussars, and the
Egyptian camel corps, with two guns, had work enough and to spare.
'The perils and difficulties,' we are told, 'were quite as great as
any hitherto encountered on the passage up the Nile.  For the last
six miles below Birti the river takes an acute angle, and then as
sharply resumes its former course.  The Royal Highlanders were first
up; but after they got their boats through, another channel was
discovered on the western side of the stream, and as it turned out to
be less difficult, the succeeding regiments were enabled to come up
more quickly.

Roland's regiment remained in a few days encamped at Hamdab.  'We are
now leading the whole army,' says its Colonel, the gallant and
ill-fated Eyre, in his 'Diary,' 'and are the first British troops
that have ever been up the Nile.'

On the 6th of January there was a sand-storm from dawn till sunset;
it covered the unfortunate troops, who seemed to be in a dark cloud
for the whole day.  Around them for a hundred miles the country was
all rocks, and yet bore traces of once having a vast population.

At Hamdab the river teemed with wild geese--beautiful gray birds,
with scarlet breasts and gold wings.  Dick Mostyn shot one, which
Roland's soldier servant prepared for their repast in a stew, that
was duly enjoyed in the latter's quarters--a hut made of palm
branches and long dhurra grass; while their comrade Wilton, when
scouting on Berber road, captured a couple of Arabs, who gave the
column a false alarm by tidings of an attack at daybreak, thus
keeping all under arms till the sun rose.

The 18th was Sunday, when Colonel Eyre read prayers on parade, and
three days after came tidings of the battle of Abu Klea, the death of
Burnaby, after all his hair-breadth escapes, and of many other brave
men.

'Poor Malcolm--poor Malcolm!' said Roland; 'what dire news this will
be for his old mother at Dunnimarle.  This event gives you your
company in the corps----'

'Don't speak of it!' interrupted Mostyn, with something like a groan;
'I would to Heaven that poor Skene had never given me such a chance.'

The last days of January saw Earle's column making a sweep with fire
and sword of the district in which poor Colonel Stewart and his
companions had been murdered; and on the 2nd of February it had
reached a country beyond all conception or description wild, and
quite uninhabited.

The sufferings of Earle's troops were considerably severe now.  The
faces and the knees of the Highlanders were skinned by the chill air
at night and the burning sun by day; while, in addition, there were
insects in the sand, so minute as to be almost invisible, yet they
got into the men's ragged clothing, and bit hands and feet so that
they were painfully swollen.

On the 9th of February Earle's column reached Kirbekan, near the
island of Dulka, seventy miles above Merawi, which is a peninsular
district of Southern Nubia, and the enemy, above 2,000 strong, led by
Moussa Abu Hagil, Ali Wad Aussein, and other warlike Sheikhs, and
chiefly composed of the guilty Monnassir tribe, some Robatats and a
force of Dervishes from Berber, were known to be in position at no
great distance; thus a battle was imminent.

Ere it took place Roland Lindsay and his friend Elliot were destined
to hear some startling news from home.  At this time all papers and
parcels for the column got no further than Dongola, but a few letters
from the rear were brought up, and the mail-bag contained one of
importance for Roland, and several for his friend Dick Mostyn.

Lounging on the grass, under a mimosa tree, with a cigarette between
his teeth, and with just the same lazy, _debonnair_ bearing with
which he had taken in many a girl at home in pleasant England, lay
Dick Mostyn reading his missives.  Some he perused with a quiet,
_insouciant_ smile; they were evidently from some of the girls in
question.  Others he tore into small shreds and scattered on the
breeze; they were duns.  How pleasant it was to dispose of them thus
on the bank of the Nile!

Roland, a little way apart, was perusing his solitary letter.

It was from Mr. M'Wadsett, the W.S., dated several weeks back, from
'Thistle Court, Thistle Street, Edinburgh' (how well Roland
remembered the gloomy place under the shadow of St. Andrew's Church,
and the purpose of his last visit there!); and it proved quite a
narrative, and one of the deepest interest to him.

His uncle, Sir Harry, was dead, and his daughter Hester was going
forth into the world as a companion or governess.  (Dead! thought
Roland; poor old Sir Harry!--and Hester, alone now--oh, how he longed
to be with her--to comfort and protect her!)

But to be a governess--a companion--where, and to whom?  His heart
felt wrung, and he mentally rehearsed all he had heard or read--but
not seen--of how such dependents were too often treated by the
prosperous and the _parvenu_; obliged to conform to rules made by
others, to perform a hundred petty duties by hands never before
soiled by toil; to never complain, however ill or weary she might
feel; to stumble with brats through wearisome scales on an old piano;
to be banished when visitors came, and endure endless, though often
unnecessary affronts.  He uttered a malediction, lit a cigar, and
betook him again to his letter.

'About seeking a situation, I know there is nothing else left for the
poor girl to do,' continued the writer; 'but I besought her to wait a
little--to make my house her home, if she chose, for a time; but she
told me that she did not mind work or poverty.  I replied that she
knew nothing of either, but a sad smile and a resolute glance were my
only answer.'

The old man's love of himself, his upbraiding words when they last
parted, and his own unkind treatment (to say the least of it) of
Hester, all came surging back on Roland's memory now.

'I shall not readily forget Miss Maule's passionate outburst of grief
and pain on leaving Merlwood,' continued the old Writer to the
Signet; 'but all there seemed for the time to be sacred to the
hallowed memories of her father, her mother, and her past childhood!

'And next I have to relate something more startling still--the sudden
death of your stepmother, and to congratulate you on being now the
true and undoubted _Laird of Earlshaugh_.

'Actuated, I know not precisely by what sentiment--whether by just
indignation at the character of her brother, or by remorse for your
false position with regard to the property--Mrs. Lindsay, as an act
of reparation, and to preclude all legal action on the part of any
heir of her own or of her brother, Hawkey Sharpe, that might crop up,
by a will drawn out and prepared by myself, duly recorded at Her
Majesty's General Register House, Edinburgh, has left the entire
estate to you, precisely and in all entirety as it was left to her.

'She sent a message when she did this.  It was simply: "When my time
comes, and I feel assured that it is not far off now, and that I
shall not see him again, he will know that I have done my best."

'There must have been an emotion of remorse in her mind, as I now
know that for some days before the demise of your worthy father, he
eagerly urged that you should be telegraphed for, and more than once
expressed a vehement desire to see _me_, his legal adviser, but in
vain, as Mrs. Lindsay number two and her brother Hawkey barred the
way; so the first will in the former's favour remained unaltered.

'Since you last left home, Mr. Hawkey forged his sister's name to a
cheque for £2,000 to cover a bill or racing debt.  It duly came to
hand.  Mrs. Lindsay looked at the document, and knew in an instant
that her name had been used, and, remembering the amount of Hawkey's
demand on her, knew also that she had been shamefully and cruelly
deceived.

'The sequence of the numbers in her cheque-book showed by the absence
of the counterfoil where one had been abstracted--that for the £2,000
payable to bearer.  In her rage she repudiated it, and the law took
its course.

'The nameless horror that is the sure precursor of coming evil took
possession of her, and then it was that she executed in your favour
the will referred to, instigated thereto not a little by Hawkey's
incessant and annoying references to her secret ailment--disease of
the heart.

'To me she seemed to have changed very much latterly.  Her tall, thin
figure had lost somewhat of its erectness, and her cold, steel-like
eyes (you remember them?) were sunken and dimmed.

'Her illness took a sudden and fatal turn at the time that rascal
Hawkey was arrested; and she was found that evening by Mrs. Drugget,
the housekeeper, and old Funnell, the butler, dead in the Red
Drawing-room.  Thus her strange faintnesses and continued pallor were
fully accounted for by the faculty then.

'When she was dead Mr. Hawkey was disposed to snap his fingers,
believing himself the lord of everything; but the will prepared by me
precluded that, and he was forthwith lodged by order of the
Procurator-Fiscal in the Tolbooth of Cupar, where he can hear, but
not see, the flow of the Eden.

'His wife, the late Miss Annot Drummond, on seeing him depart with a
pair of handcuffs on, displayed but small emotions of regard or
sorrow, but a great deal of indignation, despair, and shame.  She
trod to and fro upon the floor of her room during the long watches of
the entire succeeding night, tore her golden hair, and beat her
little hands against the wall in the fury and agony of her passion
and disappointment to find herself mated to a criminal; and now she
has betaken herself to her somewhat faded maternal home in South
Belgravia, where I do not suppose we shall care to follow her.'

'So, I am Earlshaugh again!' thought Roland with pardonable
exultation.  His old ancestral home was his once more.  But a battle
was to be fought on the morrow.  Should he survive it--escape?  He
hoped so now; life was certainly more valuable than it seemed to him
before that mail-bag came up the Nile.

Roland could not feel much regret for the extinguisher which Fate had
put upon the usurpers of his patrimony, but he was by nature too
generous not to recall, with some emotions of a gentle kind, how Mrs.
Lindsay had once said to him in a broken voice, when he bade her
farewell, of something she meant to do, 'If it was not too late--too
late!'

And when he had asked her _what_ she referred to, her answer was that
'Time would show.'

And now time had shown.  She had certainly, after all, liked the
handsome and _debonnair_ young fellow who had treated her with that
chivalrous deference so pleasant to all women, old or young.

Roland, as he looked up at the luminous Nubian sky, felt for a time a
solemn emotion of awe and thankfulness, curiously blended with
exultant pride; that if he fell in the battle of to-morrow he would
fall, as many of his forefathers had done, a Lindsay of Earlshaugh,
but alas! the last of his race.

'By Jove, there is a postscript--turn the page, Roland!' exclaimed
Jack Elliot, who had been noting the letter, as mutual stock, over
his brother-in-law's shoulder.

'Since writing all the foregoing,' said the postscript, 'I find that
your sister, Mrs. Elliot, appears to have had some news, after
receiving which she and Miss Hester have suddenly left Edinburgh, but
for _where_ or with what intention I am totally unable to discover.'

'News,' muttered Roland; 'what news can they have had?'

Roland, by the field telegraph rearward, _viâ_, Cairo, wired a
message to Mr. M'Wadsett for further intelligence, if he had any to
give, concerning the absentees, but no answer came till long after
the troops had got under arms to engage, and Roland was no longer
there to receive it.

'By Heaven, this infernal coil at home is becoming more entangled!'
exclaimed Jack.  'Were it not for my mother's sake I would hope to be
knocked on the head to-day.'

'Not for poor little Maude's sake?' asked Roland reproachfully.

'God help us both!' sighed Jack.

'To every one who lives strength is given him to do his duty,' said
Roland gravely.  'Do yours, Jack, and no more.'

'To me there seems a dash of sophistry in this advice now; but had
you ever loved as I have done----'

'Had I ever loved!  What do you mean?' asked Roland, almost
impatiently.  'But there go the bugles, and we must each to his
company.'

Then each, seizing the other's hand, drew his sword and 'fell in.'

The mystery involving the fate of Maude and the movements of both her
and Hester were a source of intense pain, perplexity, and grief to
the two friends now, even amid the fierce and wild work of that
eventful 10th of February.




CHAPTER LVI.

THE BATTLE OF KIRBEKAN.

On the night before this brilliant encounter the greatest enthusiasm
prevailed in the ranks of General Earle's column at the prospect of a
brush with the enemy at last, after an advance of eighteen most weary
miles, which had occupied them no less than twenty days, such was the
terrible nature of the country to be traversed by stream and desert.
As a fine Scottish ballad has it:

  'With painful march across the sand
    How few, though strong, they come,
  Some thinking of the clover fields
    And the happy English home;
  And some whose graver features speak
    Them children of the North,
  Of the golden whin on the Lion Hill
    That crouches by the Forth.

  ''Tis night, and through the desert air
    The pibroch's note screams shrill,
  Then dies away--the bugle sounds--
    Then all is deathly still,
  Save now and then a soldier starts
    As through the midnight air
  A sudden whistle tells him that
    The scouts of death are there!'


At half-past five in the morning, after a meagre and hurried
breakfast--the last meal that many were to partake of on earth--the
column got under arms and took its march straight inland over a very
rocky district for more than a mile, while blood-red and fiery the
vast disc of the sun began to appear above the far and hazy horizon.

Of the scene of these operations very little is known.  Lepsius, in
his learned work published in 1844, writes of the ruins of Ben Naga,
now called Mesaurat el Kerbegan, lying in a valley of that name, in a
wild and sequestered place, where no living thing is seen but the
hippopotami swimming amid the waters of the Nile.

Taking ground to the left for about half a mile the column struck
upon the caravan track that led to Berber, and then the enemy came in
sight, led by the Sheikhs Moussa Abu Hagil, Ali Wad, Aussein, and
others, holding a rocky position, where their dark heads were only
visible, popping up from time to time as seen by the field-glasses.

It was intended that the Monassir tribe, the murderers of Donald
Stewart and his party, should, if possible, be surrounded and cut
off; but they were found to be entrenched and prepared for a
desperate resistance on lofty ground near the Shukuk Pass on a ridge
of razor-backed hills, commanding a gorge which lies between the
latter and the Nile, and the entrance to which they had closed by a
fort and walls loopholed for musketry.

'The Black Watch and Staffordshire will advance in skirmishing
order!' was the command of General Earle.

Six companies of the Highlanders and four of the latter corps now
extended on both flanks at a run.  The Hussars galloped to the right,
while two companies of the Staffordshire, with two guns, were left to
protect the boats in the river, the hospital corps, the stores, and
spare ammunition.

This order was maintained till the companies of skirmishers
gradually, and firing with admirable coolness and precision, worked
their way towards the high rocks in their front.  While closing in
with the enemy, whose furious fusillade enveloped the dark ridge in
white smoke, streaked by incessant flashes of red fire, men were
falling down on every hand with cries to God for help or mercy, and
some, it might be, with a fierce and bitter malediction.

There was no time to think, for the next bullet might floor the
thinker: it was the supreme moment which tries the heart of the
bravest; but every officer and man felt that he must do his duty at
all hazards.  Bullets sang past, thudded in silvery stars on the
rocks, cut the clothing, or raised clouds of dust; comrades and dear
friends were going down fast, as rifles were tossed up and hands were
lifted heavenward--as, more often, men fell in death, in blood and
agony; but good fortune seemed to protect the untouched, and then
came the clamorous and tiger-like longing to close in, to grapple
with, to get within grasp of the foe!

In this spirit Roland went on, but keeping his skirmishers well in
hand, till they reached the high rocks in front, when they rushed
between or over them; and there Colonel Eyre, a noble, veteran
officer, and remarkably handsome man, who, though a gentleman by
birth, had risen from the ranks in the Crimea--then as now
conspicuous for his bravery--fell at the head of his beloved South
Staffordshire while attacking the second ridge, 'where, behind some
giant boulders, the Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil was with his Robatat
tribe--the most determined of the Arab race.'

The good Colonel was pausing for a moment beside two of his wounded
men.  'Colonel Eyre took one of them by the hand,' wrote an officer
whom we are tempted to quote, 'to comfort him a little.  A minute
after he turned to me and said: "I am a dead man!"  I saw a mark
below his shoulder, and said: "No, you are not."  He looked at me for
a second, and said: "Lord, have mercy upon me--God help my poor
wife!" ... He was dead in a minute after he was hit, and did not
appear to suffer, the shock being so great.  The bullet entered the
right breast, and came out under the left shoulder.'

Like a roaring wave the infuriated Staffordshire went on, and then
the Robatat tribe were assailed by two companies of the Highlanders,
led by their Colonel and General Earle in person.  'The Black Watch
advanced over rocks and broken ground upon the Koppies,' says Lord
Wolseley's very brief despatch, 'and, after having by their fire in
the coolest manner driven off a rush of the enemy, stormed the
position under a heavy fire.'

But desperate was the struggle prior to this.  The Arabs, from the
cover of every rock and boulder, poured in a fire with the most
murderous precision, while our soldiers flung themselves headlong at
any passage or opening they found, no matter how narrow or steep.

Like wild tigers in their lair, the Arabs fought at bay, having
everywhere the advantage of the ground, and inspired by a fury born
of fanaticism and religious rancour, resolute to conquer or die; but
in spite of odds and everything, our soldiers stormed rock after
rock, and fastness after fastness, working their way on by bayonet
and bullet, the Black Watch on the left, the old 38th on the right,
upward and onward, over rocks slippery with dripping blood, over the
groaning, the shrieking, the dying, and the dead.

Here fell Wilton and merry Dick Mostyn, both mortally wounded,
rolling down the rocks to die in agony; and to Roland it was evident
that Jack Elliot was bitterly intent on throwing his life away if he
could, for he rushed, sword in hand, at any loophole in the rocks
from whence a puff of smoke or flash of fire spirted out.

But brilliant as was the rush of the Staffordshire, climbing with
their hands and feet, it was almost surpassed by the advance of the
Highlanders, for in the _élan_ with which they went on every man
seemed as if inspired by the advice of General Brackenbury when he
said: 'Take your heart and throw it among the enemy, as Douglas did
that of King Robert Bruce, and follow it with set teeth determined to
win!'

When General Earle ordered the left half-battalion of the Highlanders
to advance by successive rushes, they went forward with a ringing
cheer and with pipers playing 'The Campbells are coming,' and in
another moment the scarlet coats and green kilts, led by Wauchop of
Niddry, had crowned the ridge, rolling the soldiers of the Mahdi down
the rocks before their bayonets in literal piles that never rose
again, and then it was that Colonel Coveny, one of their most popular
officers, fell.

Roland felt proud of his regiment, the old South Staffordshire, but
when he saw the tartans fluttering on the crest, and heard the pipes
set up their pæan of victory, all his heart went forth to the
Highlanders, who, ere these successive rushes were carried out, had
been attacked by a most resolute band of the enemy, armed with long
spears and trenchant swords, led by a standard-bearer clad in a long
Darfour shirt of mail.

The latter, the Sheikh Moussa Abu Hagil, was shot, and as his body
went rolling down, the holy standard was seized in succession by
three men of resolute valour, who all perished successively in the
same manner.  Some of this band now rushed away towards the Nile to
escape the storm of Highland bullets, but were there met by a company
of the Staffordshire and shot down to a man.

Within the koppie stormed by the Highlanders was a stone hut full of
Arabs, who, though surrounded by victorious troops, defiantly refused
to surrender.  General Earle, a veteran Crimean officer of the old
49th, or Hertfordshire, now rashly approached it, though warned by a
sergeant of the Black Watch to beware, and was immediately shot dead.

An entrance was found to be impossible, so securely was the door
barricaded.  Then the edifice was set on fire by the infuriated
Highlanders, breached by powder, and all the Arabs within it were
shot down or burned alive.

The enemy now fled on all hands, while the chivalrous Buller, with a
squadron of the 19th Hussars, captured the camp three miles in rear
of their position, and Brackenbury, as senior officer, assumed the
command.

Our casualties were eighty-seven of all ranks killed and wounded;
those of the enemy it was impossible to estimate, as only seventeen
were taken alive, but their dead covered all the position, and an
unknown number perished in the Nile.

Untouched, after that terrible conflict of five consecutive hours,
Roland Lindsay and Jack Elliot grasped each other's hands in warmth
and gratitude when they sheathed their swords and felt that their
ghastly work was done.

The subsequent day was devoted to quiet and rest, and on the field,
under a solitary palm tree, the remains of General Earle, Colonels
Eyre, Coveny, and all who had fallen with them, were reverently
interred, without any special mark to attract the attention of the
dwellers in the desert.

After all this, Brigadier Brackenbury was about to march in the
direction of Abu Hammed, when unexpected instructions from the
vacillating British Government reached Lord Wolseley from London, and
the river column was ordered to fall back on the camp at Korti, a
task of no small difficulty; and though a handful of men under Sir
Charles Wilson did reach Khartoum, as we all know, the movement was
achieved too late, and, cruelly betrayed, Gordon had perished in the
midst of his fame.




CHAPTER LVII.

THE SICK CONVOY.

Repeatedly Jack Elliot thanked Heaven that his comrades in the
regiment had not got hold of his wretched story--that he and his
young wife had quarrelled--were actually separated, and that she had
run away from him because of some other woman, as he knew well that
but garbled versions of the comedies or tragedies in the lives of our
friends generally reach us.

The movements of the column were now so abrupt, and, for a time,
undecided, that no telegram in reply to his message reached Roland
from Edinburgh, and ere long he had a new source of anxiety.

Enteric fever, that ailment which proved so fatal to many of our
troops during this disastrous and useless war, fastened upon poor
Jack Elliot, and the column had barely reached the camp at Korti when
he was 'down' with it, as the soldiers phrased it, and very seriously
so--all the more seriously, no doubt, that the tenor of Mr.
M'Wadsett's postscript left such a doubt on his mind as to the plans
and movements of Maude.

His head felt as if weighted with lead--but hot lead; he had an
appalling thirst, and was destitute of all appetite even for
delicacies, and the latter were not plentiful, certainly, in our camp
at Korti.

If he survived, which he thought was almost impossible, he believed
that he could never, never forget what he endured in the so-called
camp there--first, the languor and disinclination for work, duty,
exercise, even for thinking; the pains in his limbs; his dry, brown
tongue, that rattled in his mouth; mental and bodily debility; and
all the other signs of his ailment, produced by exposure, by midnight
dew, and the bad, brackish water of the desert.

Roland--of a hardier nature, perhaps--was unwearying in his care of
him, and thrice daily with his own hands gave him the odious
prescribed draught--hydrochloric acid, tincture of orange, and so
forth, diluted in Nile water--while the once strong, active, and
muscular Jack was weak as a baby.

Roland greatly feared he would die on his hands, and hailed with
intense satisfaction an order by which he was personally detailed to
take a detachment of certain sick and wounded, including Jack Elliot,
down the Nile to Lower Egypt.

In his tent, he was roused from an uneasy dream that he was again
lying at the bottom of the Kelpie's Cleugh at Earlshaugh, by an
orderly sergeant, who brought him this welcome command about dawn,
and noon saw him, with a small flotilla of boats freighted with pain
and suffering, take his leave of the South Staffordshire and begin
his journey down the Nile, _viâ_ New Dongola, the cataracts at
Ambigol and elsewhere, by Wady-Halfa and other points where temporary
hospitals or halting-places were established.

Day by day the boats with their melancholy loads, sometimes by oars,
at others with canvas set, had dropped down the Nile between barren
shores overlooked by wild and sterile mountains, where the sick were
almost stunned occasionally by the harsh yells of the watchful Arabs
echoing from rocks and caves! and, after turning a sharp angle,
Roland suddenly saw the island of Phite, with all its numerous
temples, before his flotilla, and as there was a considerable flood
in the river the cataract there became a source of anxiety to him,
and rather abated the interest with which he might otherwise have
surveyed the scene around him.

'Shellal!  Shellal!' (the Cataract! the Cataract!) he heard the yells
of the naked Arabs, who hovered on the banks expecting a catastrophe,
which they would have beheld with savage joy.

The soldiers held their breath and hung on their suspended oars, the
blades of which dripped and flashed like gold in the sheen of the
setting sun; yet the boats glided down the foaming rapid without a
sound other than the rush of the water; then came a sudden calm, an
amazing combination of light and colour on shore, and isle, and
stream, with the rays of the moon, in the blue zenith, conflicting
with those of the sun at the horizon.

'On either side,' wrote one who was there, 'walls of overhanging rock
shut in the river, standing in pious guardianship around the sacred
isle.  Beneath their frowning blackness lapped and flowed a shining
expanse of water stained with crimson in the sunset's glow, in which
a line of tall and plumy palms were bending in the wind; to the east,
the Libyan sands poured in a golden stream through every cleft and
fissure in the darkling hills; and overhead, and all about, floated a
splendour of reddening fire.  From their station they seemed to look
straight into the very heart of the sunset when all the west had
burst into sudden flames of fire.  The freshening wind tossed them in
uncertain rise and fall; the melancholy sound of the distant
cataract, and now and then the cry of some night bird cut sharply
through the stillness of the hour.  An immense sense of loneliness
brooded over the empty temples and adjacent isles abandoned by their
forgotten gods, whose sculptured faces gazed mournfully out from the
crumbling walls, then flushed with the supreme splendour of the dying
day.

A few miles further down, the Isle of Flowers, with all its wondrous
vegetation, and the many black rocks of Assouan rising from a medley
of dust, Roman ruins and feathery palms were left astern; and of the
long, long downward journey some 450 miles were mastered, after which
lay nearly the same distance to Cairo.

Often had the boats to pause in their downward way, while the
melancholy duty was performed of burying those whose journey in life
was over, by the river bank, uncoffined, in nameless and unrecorded
graves, where the ibis stalks among the tall reeds, and the scaly
crocodile dozes amid the ooze.

And as the boat in which he lay under an awning glided down the Nile
Jack Elliot was often in a species of stupor, and muttered at times
of his boyish days at the High School of Edinburgh; of the brawling
Tweed when he had been wont to fish at Braidielee; of matches at
Aldershot, and clearing the hurdles in the Long Valley; but he was
most often a boy, a lad again in his fevered dreams, and seeking
birds' nests among the bonnie Lammermuirs, feeling the pleasant
breeze that came over the braes of the Merse, while the sun shone on
the pools and thickets of the Eye and the Leader; but of Maude,
strange to say, or their mysterious separation, no word escaped him,
till he became conscious, and then Roland would hear him muttering as
he kissed her photo:

'Where are you, my darling?  Shall I ever look upon your face again?'

And with a wasted and trembling hand he would consign the soft
leather case to the breast of his tattered and faded tunic.  He was
so weak, so utterly debilitated that sometimes he shed involuntary
tears--a sight that filled Roland with infinite pity and
commiseration, and a dread each day that he might have to leave Jack,
as he had left others, in a lonely tomb by the river-side.

Jack, poor fellow, was dwelling generally in a land of shadows;
familiar scenes and faces came and receded, and loved voices came and
sank curiously in his ear, while his apparently dying eyes and lips
pled vainly for one kiss of his sunny-haired Maude to sweeten the
bitter draught of that death which seemed so close and nigh.

But he was still struggling between life and eternity, when in the
ruddy haze Roland hailed the purple outlines of the Pyramids in the
Plain of Ghizeh, the ridge of the Jebel Mokattam, the distant
minarets and the magnificent citadel of Cairo.

On reaching the Kasr-el-Nil Barracks, Roland was ordered to be
attached for duty purposes to a regiment quartered there till further
orders, as no more troops were proceeding up the Nile.

Though the battle of Hasheen was to be fought and won, and the
lamentable fiasco of Macneill's zereba to occur at Suakim, the war
was deemed virtually over, as the cause for it had collapsed by
Gordon's betrayal and the fall of Khartoum.

With the general advance of the expedition under Lord Wolseley to
rescue Gordon, our story has only had a certain connection--a mission
undertaken far too late, but during which the mind at home was kept
at fever-heat by news from that burning seat of strife, recording the
sufferings of our soldiers, and the bloody but victorious battles
with the Mahdists, till the dark and terrible tidings came, that just
as Wilson's column was ready to join Gordon, who had sent his
steamers to Metemneh to meet him--Khartoum, after a defence perhaps
unsurpassed in the annals of peril and glory, had fallen by storm and
treachery, and the people of Britain were left to wonder, and in
doubt, whether a stupendous blunder or an unpardonable crime had been
perpetrated.




CHAPTER LVIII.

IN THE SHOUBRAH GARDENS.

Roland lost no time in telegraphing home for news of the missing
ones, but received none; Mr. M'Wadsett was absent from town, so he
and Jack Elliot, who was far from recovery yet, had to take patience
and wait, they scarcely knew for what.  One fact was too patent, that
both Hester and Maude had disappeared--one too probably in penury and
the other in an agony of grief and shame.  It was not even known,
apparently, whether they were together.

They had vanished, and, save a cheque or two cashed by Jack's
bankers, left no trace of how or when; and a chilling fear crept over
the hearts of both men as to what might have happened--illness,
poverty, unthought-of snares, even death itself.

Meanwhile, 'the shadow, cloaked from head to foot, who keeps the keys
of all the creeds,' was hovering perilously near Jack, for whom
Roland procured quarters in a pleasant house in the beautiful
Shoubrah Road, near Cairo--a broad but shady avenue formed of noble
sycamores, the 'Rotten Row' of the city, and day followed day
somewhat monotonously now, though a letter dated some weeks back from
his legal friend of Thistle Court gave Roland some occasion for
gratifying thought.

'If you can return,' it ran, 'must I remind you that now Earlshaugh
is unoccupied; the land so far neglected, and the tenants well-nigh
forgotten; the rents are accumulating at your bankers', but no good
is done to anyone.  Your proper place and position is your own again;
justice has restored your birthright; so come home at once and act
wisely--home, my dear friend, and you shall have such a welcome as
Earlshaugh has not seen since your father came back after the Crimean
War.'

Pondering over this letter and on what the future might have in
store, Roland was one afternoon idling over a cigarette in the
gardens of the Shoubrah Palace, an edifice which rises from the bank
of the Nile.  On one side are pleasant glimpses of the latter, with
its palm-clad banks and sparkling villages; on the other a tract of
brilliantly tinted cultivation, and beyond it the golden sands of the
desert, the shifting hillocks they form, and the gray peaks of
several pyramids.

The gardens, surpassingly beautiful and purely Oriental in character,
are entered by long and winding walks of impenetrable shade, from
which we emerge on open spaces that team with roses, with gilded
pavilions and painted kiosks.  'Arched walks of orange-trees with the
fruit and flowers hanging over your head lead to fountains,' says a
Jewish writer, 'or to some other garden court, where myrtles border
beds of tulips, and you wander on mosaic walks of polished pebbles; a
vase flashes amid a group of dark cypresses, and you are invited to
repose under a Syrian walnut-tree by a couch or summer-house.  The
most striking picture, however, of this charming retreat is a lake
surrounded by light cloisters of white marble, and in the centre a
fountain of crocodiles carved in the same material.'

Lulled by the heat, by the drowsy hum made by the sound of many
carriages filled with harem beauties or European ladies rolling to
and fro on the adjacent Shoubrah Road, with the ceaseless patter of
hoofs, as mounted Cairene dandies and our cavalry officers rode in
the same gay promenade, Roland reclined on a marble seat, lit another
cigarette, and watched the giant flowers of the Egyptian lotus in the
little lake, blue and white, that sink when the sun sets, but open
and rise when it is shining, till suddenly he saw a young lady
appear, who was evidently idling in the gardens like himself.

He could see that she was a European.  With one glove drawn off,
showing a hand the pure whiteness of which contrasted with her dark
dress, she was playing with the water of a red marble fountain that
fell sparkling into the lakelet, not ten yards from where he was
seated, unseen by her.

Suddenly his figure, in his undress uniform, caught her eye; she
turned and looked full at him, as if spellbound.

'Roland!' she exclaimed.

'Hester--good heavens, can it be?--Hester, and _here_!' said he.

Hester she was; he sprang to her side, and they took each other's
hands, both for a moment in dumb confusion and bewilderment.  At the
moment of this meeting and before recognition, even when hovering
near him, and he had been all unconscious of who the tall and slender
girl in mourning really was, she had been thinking of him, and as she
had often thought--

'I loved Roland all my life--better than my own soul; but such a love
as mine is too often only its own best reward; and many a sore heart
like mine learns that never in this world is it measured to us again
as we have meted it out.'

Thus bitterly had the girl been pondering, when she found herself
suddenly face to face with the subject of her reverie, and, in spite
of herself, a little cloud was blended with the astonishment her eyes
expressed.

'Hester--what mystery is this?  And are you not glad to see me?' he
asked impetuously.

'Glad--oh, Roland! glad indeed, and that you escaped that dreadful
day at Kirbekan!' she replied, while her eyes became humid now.

'God bless you, my darling!' he exclaimed, as all his soul seemed
suddenly to go forth to her, and he would have drawn her to him; but
she thought of Annot Drummond, and fell back a pace.  'Hester,' said
he upbraidingly, 'will you not accord me one kiss, darling?'

She grew pale now, for she feared that her welcome had been more
cordial than he had any right to expect; but the circumstances were
peculiar, their place and mode of meeting alike strange and
unexpected; but it was impossible for her not to guess, to read in
his eyes, in fact, all the tender passion of love, esteem, and
kinship that filled his heart for her now.

'How well you are looking, Hester, after all you must have
suffered--some of the old rose's hue is back to your cheek, darling.'

'Don't speak thus, Roland--I--I----' she faltered.

'Why not, Hester?  You loved me, I know, even as I loved you.'

'Before that beautiful little hypocrite and adventuress came,' said
she, with quiet bitterness, 'I certainly did love you, Roland----'

'And love me still, Hester?'

'Do I look as if I had let the worm in the bud feed on my damask
cheek?' said she, with a little gasping laugh; 'has my hair grown
thin or white?  How vain you are, Cousin Roland!'

'No, Hester' (how he loved to utter her name!); 'though I admit to
having been a hopeless and thoughtless fool--no worse; but, forgive
me, dear Hester; I ask you in the name of your good old father, who
so loved us both, and in memory of our pleasant past at Merlwood.'

She made no answer; but her downcast eyes were full of tears; her
breast was heaving, and her lips were quivering now.

'It ought not to be hard to forgive you, Roland, as you never said,
even in that pleasant past, that you loved me; and yet, perhaps--but
I must go now,' she said, interrupting herself, as she turned round
wearily and vaguely.

'Go where?' he asked.  'But how came you to be here--here in
Cairo--and whither are you going?'

'To where I reside,' she replied, with a soft smile; for, with all
her love for him, and with all her supreme joy at meeting him again
thus safe and sound, and in a manner so unprecedentedly peculiar, she
was not disposed quite to strike her colours and yield at once.

'Reside!' thought Roland, with a flush of anger in his heart; 'as
companion, governess, nursing sister, or--what?'

'To where I reside with Maude,' she added, almost reading his
thoughts.

'Is Maude here, too?'

'Yes; we came together in quest of you and Jack.  Oh! where is
he?--well and safe, too, I am sure, or you would not be looking so
bright.  Maude left her home under a mistake--the victim of a
conspiracy, hatched, as we know now, by that wretched creature
Sharpe.'

'And she is here--here in Cairo?'

'Yes.'

'This seems miraculous!'

'Come with me to Maude.'

'And then to Jack--to poor Jack, whom the sight of her beloved face
will surely make well and strong again.'

And, as people in a dream, in another minute they were in a cab--for
cabs are now to be had in the city of the Caliphs and the
Mamelukes--and were bowling towards one of the stately squares in the
European quarter through strangely picturesque streets of lofty,
latticed, and painted houses, richly carved as Gothic shrines, where,
by day, the many races that make up the population of Cairo in their
bright and varied costumes throng on foot, on horse or donkey-back;
and where, by night, rope-dancers, conjurers, fire-eaters, and
tumblers, with sellers of fruit, flowers, sherbet, and coffee, make
up a scene of noise and bustle beyond description; and now certainly,
with Hester suddenly conjured up by his side, Roland felt, we say, as
if in a dream wild and sudden as anything in the 'Arabian Nights.'

Does love once born lie dormant to live again?

Judging by his own experience, he thought so, with truth.

More than once when he had gone forth into the world with his
regiment he had almost forgotten the little Hester as she had been to
him, a sweet, piquante, and dainty figure amid the groves of
Merlwood, and in the background of his boyish days; then in his
soldier's life, she would anon flit across the vista of memory,
fondly and pleasantly, till he learned to love her (ere that other
came, that Circe with her cup and the dangerous charm of novelty);
and now all his old passion sprang into existence, holding his heart
in its purity and strength as if it had never wandered from
her--tender, unselfish, and true as his boyish love had been in the
past time; yet just then, by her side, and with her hand within grasp
of his own, he felt his lips but ill unable to express all he thought
and felt, and his fear of--_the refusal_ that might come.

Then he was about to see his dearly-loved sister Maude; but his joy
thereat was clouded by the dread and knowledge that poor Jack's life
was trembling in the balance.




CHAPTER LIX.

CONCLUSION.

The fond white arms of Maude were around Jack, his head was pillowed
on her breast; so the young pair were once more together, and she
had, of course, installed herself as his nurse.

Oh, how haggard, wan, wasted, and changed he was!

He lay quiet, motionless, and happy, if 'weak as a cat,' he said,
with the hum of the great city of Cairo coming faintly through the
latticed windows that overlooked the vast Uzbekyeh Square and its
gardens, whilom a marsh, and now covered with stately trees, under
which are cafés for the sale of coffee, sherbet, and punch, where
bands play in the evenings, and Franks and Turks may be seen with
Europeans in their Nizam dresses, and the Highlander in his white
jacket and tartan kilt.

How delightful it was to have her dear caresses again--to feel her
soft breath on his faded cheek; all seemed so new, so strange, that
he almost feared the delicious spell might break, and he, awaking,
find himself again in his grass hut at Korti, or gliding down the
Nile in the whaleboat of the old Staffordshire, with Arabs to repel,
rocks to avoid, and cataracts to shoot with oar and pole.

'Oh, Jack,' said Maude, for the twentieth time, 'forgive and pardon
me for doubting you; but that woman----'

'A vile plot--backed up by a forged letter!  My little Maude, it
would not have borne a moment's investigation!'

'I know--I know now; but I was so terrified--so crushed--so lonely!
And then, think of the days and nights of horror and agony I
underwent.  The woman dying of a street accident in the Infirmary of
Edinburgh, signed a confession of her story--that she was the bribed
agent of Sharpe's plot.  I wrote all about it, but you never got my
letter.'

'And this was "the startling news" that made you so suddenly leave
Edinburgh?'

'To come here in search of you.  Oh, Jack!  I was mad to doubt you;
but you would quite pardon me if you knew all I have undergone.
Shall I ever forget the night she came--the night of that aimless
flight south--aimless, save to avoid you--but ending at York?  Oh
never, Jack, if I lived a thousand years!  I now know that it takes a
great deal to kill some people; yet I think that, but for dear,
affectionate Hester, I could not have lived very long with that awful
and never-ceasing pain gnawing at my heart.'

Jack raised her quivering face between his tremulous hands, and
looked into it fondly and yearningly.  How full of affection it
seemed--so softly radiant with shy and lovely blushes, while her eyes
of forget-me-not blue never, even in the past, shone with the
love-light that illumined them now, when sufferings were past and
their memory becoming fainter.

'How long--how long it seems since we separated, and without a
farewell, Jack!'

'A day sometimes seems an age--ay, even a day, when matters of the
heart are concerned.'

'And a minute or two may undo the work of years--yea, of a lifetime.
But you must get well and strong, Jack, for the homeward voyage.  In
a few days we shall have you laughing among us again; and you will
see what a careful little nurse I shall prove.'

Jack, withal, feared just then that there was but little laughter
left for him on earth; yet their reunion and the presence of Maude
acted as a wonderful charm upon him, and from her loving little
hands, instead of those of a stolid hospital orderly, he now took his
prescribed 'baby food' as he called it--beef-tea, eggs beat up in
milk, and port wine elixir, with the odious 'diluted hydrochloric
acid, one drachm, and of quinine, eight drachms,' as ordered by the
medical staff.

But he rallied rapidly, though Maude's heart beat painfully when
occasionally a ray of sunshine stole into the room through the
picturesque lattice-wood windows (which in Cairo had not been
superseded by glass) and rested on his face, and she saw how pale and
wan, if peaceful and bright, the latter was now: and then if he spoke
too much, she placed her white hands on his lips, or silenced them
more sweetly but quite as effectually.

Hester, when she first saw Jack Elliot, little imagined that he would
recover so rapidly.  She had thought of Maude and then of her own
father.

'Strange it is,' pondered the girl, 'that when one sorrow comes upon
us--a shock unexpectedly--we seem to see the gradual approach of
another, and so realize its bitterness before it becomes an actual
fact.  Thus I felt, long before poor papa died, that I should be
alone and penniless in the world.'

'Hester!' exclaimed Roland, softly but upbraidingly, as she said
something of this kind to him.

'Well, Roland,' said Hester, 'no one seemed to care where I went or
what became of me; all the world was indifferent to me; I had lost
all interest and saw no beauty in it.'

He had both her hands in his now, and was gazing into her
white-lidded and long-lashed dark-blue eyes.

Then, as eye met eye, each saw a strange but alluring expression in
the other--the past, the present, and future all mingled and
combined--an expression of a nature deep and indescribable.

We do not mean to rehearse all that Roland said then.  If no woman
can without some emotion hear a tale of love, especially if told so
powerfully as Roland was telling it then, we may well believe how
Hester's heart responded; and he held her in his embrace, and kissed
her again and again as a man only kisses the girl he loves, and, more
than all, the one he hopes to make his wife.

So everything is said to come in time to those who wait.

They were together again--together at last--and the outer world and
all other things thereof seemed to glide away from them, leaving only
love and peace and rest behind--love and trust with the radiance of
light!



THE END.



BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PLAYING WITH FIRE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Facts for the People of the Free States, by
American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Facts for the People of the Free States

Author: American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65774]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: hekula03, Splendid Geryon and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by the Library
             of Congress)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FACTS FOR THE PEOPLE OF THE FREE
STATES ***

                     Liberty Tract. No. 2.

                     FACTS FOR THE PEOPLE

                            OF THE

                         FREE STATES.

      [Illustration: PRIVATE SLAVE-PRISON AT WASHINGTON.]

                           NEW YORK:
                 PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM HARNED,
                            FOR THE
          AMERICAN AND FOREIGN ANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY,
                       22 Spruce Street.
                   $1 PER 100, $8 PER 1000.




SOUTHERN SCENES IN 1846.


[Illustration]

Murder of Slaves.

The Abbeville (S. C.) Banner states, that two of Gov.
McDuffie's slaves were killed on Friday, Feb. 13th, by two
other slaves, acting in the capacity of _drivers_! They were
killed by what the law terms "moderate correction!"


A Slave Woman attempting Suicide at Baltimore.

In June, 1846, the Baltimore Sun gave an account of a woman who
"jumped out of the window of the place in which her owner had
confined her, and immediately took the nearest route to throw
herself into the water." She was rescued. But, says the Sun,
"Upon being taken upon the deck of the vessel, she begged the
by-standers to let her drown herself, stating, that she would
'sooner be dead, than go back again _to be beaten as she had
been_!'"


A Slave Suicide effected at Richmond, Va.

A correspondent of the Philadelphia Inquirer, July 25, 1846,
wrote from Richmond, as follows:--"An unpleasant occurrence
took place in this city yesterday. A man, who has a number
of negroes in his employment, was proceeding, for a slight
offence, to punish one of them by whipping, when the poor
wretch, knowing his master's unmerciful nature, implored that
he might be _hung_ at once, instead of whipped. This of course
would not answer, and on tying the negro's hands behind him
in the usual manner, the employer went into another room to
procure a cowhide, when the negro, taking advantage of his
master's absence, rushed from the room, jumped into the river,
and was drowned."


Slave Suicide and Slave Hunting in Louisiana.

In June, 1846, the New Orleans Commercial Times said--"We
learn that a few days since a negro man, belonging to Captain
Newport, of East Baton Rouge, while closely pursued by the dogs
of Mr. Roark, of this Parish, ascended a tree and hung himself.
Mr. Roark, with Captain Newport's son-in-law and overseer,
were in pursuit of a runaway slave. They did not know that
this negro was out, and were surprised upon their arrival, a
few minutes in the rear of the dogs, to find him suspended by
his neck, with his feet dangling only a foot or two from the
earth. Every effort was made to restore animation, but without
success, although on their coming up the body was still warm.
The act was one, it would seem, of resolute predetermination,
as the slave was well provided with cords, which he made use of
to perpetrate his suicidal purpose."


More Murders of Slaves.

The Palmyra (Mo.) Courier, in August, 1846, says:--"We
understand that a gentleman, living in Macon county, while
out hunting with his rifle, last week, came suddenly upon
two fugitive slaves, who gave him battle. He shot one, and
split the other's skull with the barrel of his gun. He then
started for home, but before reaching it he met a man in the
road, who inquired if he had seen or heard of two runaway
negroes--describing them. The gentleman replied, that he had
just killed two, and related the circumstance. On proceeding to
the spot, the stranger identified them as his slaves."




THE FUGITIVE SLAVE.

[Illustration]


A Slave Hunter Killed.

The following is from the Washington (Pa.) Patriot of 1846:
"We learn that a few days ago, a fugitive slave from Maryland
was pursued and overtaken in Somerset county, in this State
by a man named Holland, a wagoner from Ohio, who was tempted
to the task by the reward offered, $150. When they reached
McCarty's tavern the slave attempted to escape, but was caught
by Holland while in the act of climbing a fence. The slave drew
a long knife, which he had concealed about his person, and
plunged it into Holland's heart, causing his death instantly.
He made good his escape, immediately pursued by the people of
the neighborhood, who at nightfall, had surrounded him, but in
the darkness of the night he eluded their vigilance, and is now
beyond their reach."


The Rights of the Fugitive.

The Hon. J. R. Giddings, in a speech in the House of
Representatives, at Washington, Feb. 18, 1846, said--"In regard
to arresting slaves, we [of the free States] owe no duties to
the master; on the contrary, all our sympathies, our feelings,
and our moral duties, beyond what I have stated, are with the
slave. We will neither arrest him for the master, nor will
we assist the master in making such arrest. I am aware that
the third clause of the second section of the first article
of the Constitution was once believed, by some, to impose
upon the people of these free States the duty of arresting
fugitive slaves. But it is now judicially settled that no such
obligation rests upon us. Indeed a proposition to impose upon
us such a duty, at the time of framing the Constitution, was
rejected, without a division, by the Convention. We, therefore,
leave the master to arrest the slave if he can; and we leave
the slave to defend himself against the master if he can. We do
not interfere between them. The slave possesses as perfect a
right to defend his person and his liberty against the master
as any citizen of our State. Our laws protect him against every
other person, except the master or his agent, but they leave
him to protect himself against them. If he, while defending
himself, slays the master, our laws do not interfere to punish
him in any way, further than they would any other person who
should slay a man in actual self-defence. The laws of the slave
State cannot reach him, nor is there any law, of God or man,
that condemns him. On the contrary, our reason, our judgment,
our humanity approves the act; and we admire the courage and
firmness with which he defends the "inalienable rights with
which the God of Nature has endowed him." We regard him as a
hero worthy of imitation; and we place his name in the same
category with that of Madison Washington, who, on board the
Creole, boldly maintained his God-given rights, against those
inhuman pirates who were carrying him and his fellow-servants
to a worse than savage slave-market."

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER SLAVE SUICIDE. "The slave of a farmer in an adjoining
county, (Jefferson,) having been jumped upon and stamped by his
master, _with spurs on_, so as to cruelly lacerate his face as
well as his body, he was found, next morning, in an adjacent
pond or stream of water--having tied a stone to his own neck,
(as it is said,) and plunged in, for the successful purpose of
drowning himself, under the feelings of desperation caused by
the fiendish treatment of his master!"--_Balt. Sat. Visiter,
Aug., 1846._


PRESIDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES.

  ---+---------------+--------+-----+---------+------+-------+-------------+------
  No.|     Name.     | Native |Born.|Installed|Age at| Years |    Died.    | Age
     |               | State. |     |  into   | that |in the |             |at his
     |               |        |     | office. | time.|office.|             |death.
  ---+---------------+--------+-----+---------+------+-------+-------------+------
   1.|Geo. Washington|Virginia|1732 |  1789   |  57  |   8   |Dec. 14, 1799|  68
   2.|John Adams     |Mass.   |1735 |  1796   |  62  |   4   |July  4, 1826|  91
   3.|Thos. Jefferson|Virginia|1743 |  1801   |  52  |   8   |July  4, 1826|  83
   4.|James Madison  |Virginia|1751 |  1809   |  58  |   8   |June 28, 1836|  85
   5.|James Monroe   |Virginia|1758 |  1817   |  58  |   8   |July  4, 1831|  72
   6.|John Q. Adams  |Mass.   |1767 |  1825   |  58  |   4   |             |
   7.|Andrew Jackson |Virginia|1767 |  1829   |  62  |   8   |June  8, 1845|  78
   8.|M. Van Buren   |N. York |1782 |  1837   |  55  |   4   |             |
   9.|Wm. H. Harrison|Virginia|1773 |  1841   |  68  |  --   |April 4, 1841|  68
  10.|John Tyler     |Virginia|1790 |  1841   |  51  |   4   |             |
  11.|James K. Polk  |N. Car. |1795 |  1845   |  49  |       |             |


PRESIDENTIAL TESTIMONIES.

GEORGE WASHINGTON.--"I never mean, unless some
particular circumstance should compel me to it, to possess
another slave by purchase: _it being among my first wishes to
see some plan adopted by which slavery in this country may be
abolished by law_."--_Letter to John F. Mercer._

"There is not a man living, who wishes more sincerely than I
do, to see a plan adopted for the abolition of it (Slavery);
but there is only one proper and effectual mode by which it can
be accomplished, and that is, by the legislative authority;
and this, _as far as my suffrage will go, will not be
wanting_."--_Letter to Robert Morris._

JOHN ADAMS.--"Great is truth--great is liberty--great is
humanity; and they must and will prevail."

THOMAS JEFFERSON.--"The rightful _power_ of all legislation is
to declare and enforce _only_ our NATURAL RIGHTS AND DUTIES,
and _take none of them from us_. No man has a natural right
to _commit aggressions on the equal rights of another_, and
this is ALL from which the law ought to _restrain him_. Every
man is under a natural duty of contributing to the necessities
of society, and this is all the law should enforce upon him.
When the laws have declared and enforced all this, they have
fulfilled their functions."--"The idea is quite unfounded, that
on entering into society, _we give up any natural right_."

"The whole commerce between master and slave is a perpetual
exercise of the most boisterous passions; the most unremitting
despotism on the one part, and degrading submissions on the
other. * * And with what execration should the statesman be
loaded, who, permitting one-half the citizens thus to trample
on the rights of the others, transforms those into despots, and
these into enemies, destroys the morals of the one part, and
the love of country of the other. For, if a slave can have a
country in this world, it must be any other in preference to
that in which he is born to live and labor for another. * * And
can the liberties of a nation be thought secure when we have
removed their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of the
people, that these liberties are the gift of God; that they are
not to be violated but with his wrath? Indeed, I tremble for my
country when I reflect that God is just; and that his justice
cannot sleep forever. * * When the measure of the slaves' tears
shall be full; when their tears shall have involved heaven
itself in darkness; doubtless a God of justice will awaken to
their distress, and by diffusing light and liberality among
their oppressors, or, at length by his exterminating thunder,
manifest his attention to things of the world, and that they
are not left to the guidance of blind fatality."--_Notes on
Virginia._

JAMES MADISON.--"It seemed now to be pretty well understood,
that the real difference of interests lay, not between the
large and small, but between the Northern and Southern States.
The institution of slavery, and its consequences, formed the
line of discrimination."--_Speech in the Convention for the
formation of the Federal Constitution._

JAMES MONROE.--"We have found that this evil (slavery)
has preyed upon the very vitals of the Union; and has
been prejudicial to all the States in which it has
existed."--_Speech in the Virginia Convention._

JOHN Q. ADAMS.--"Nay, I may go further, and insist that that
(the slave) representation has ever been, in fact, _the
ruling power of this government._ The history of the Union
has afforded a continual proof that this representation of
property, which they enjoy, has secured to the slaveholding
States the control of the national policy, and, almost without
exception, the possession of the highest executive office of
the Union."--_Speech in Congress, Feb. 4, 1833._

"Fellow citizens: The numbers of freemen constituting your
nation are much greater than those of the slaveholding States,
bond and free. You have at least three-fifths of the whole
population of the Union. Your influence on the legislation and
the administration of the government ought to be in proportion
of three to two. But how stands the fact? * * * By means of the
double representation, the minority command the whole, and a
_knot of slaveholders give the law and prescribe the policy of
the country_."--_Speech at North Bridgewater, Nov. 6, 1844._

JAMES K. POLK.--On the 12th of May, 1841, a resolution was
introduced in Congress, to the effect, "That the President of
the United States be requested to renew, and to prosecute,
from time to time, such negotiations with the several maritime
powers of Europe and America, as he may deem expedient _for
the effectual abolition of the African Slave Trade_, and its
ultimate denunciation as _piracy_ under the law of nations,
by the consent of the civilized world." The vote on this
resolution was 118 ayes and 32 nays; _James K. Polk voting
in the negative_. (Cong. Deb. vol. 7., p. 850). Mr. Polk,
since occupying the presidency, has pardoned two individuals,
convicted in the courts of having been engaged in this trade.




BURDENS OF SLAVERY ON THE FREE.

The Presidency.


Of the fourteen presidential terms, now expired since the
formation of the government, eleven have been filled by
slaveholders, one by a "Northern man with Southern principles,"
and only two by Northern men. The present incumbent is a
slaveholder, sworn fully to do his utmost to uphold, and even
extend the abomination; and most terribly he is fulfilling his
vow, in the surrender of free territory in Oregon, and in a
war of conquest for slavery in Mexico, at a cost of millions
of dollars and thousands of lives. By holding the Presidency,
slavery controls the cabinet, the diplomacy, the army, and the
navy of the country. The power that controls the Presidency
controls the nation. No Northern President has been allowed to
serve more than one term.


The Vice Presidency.

The President exercises much of his power by and with the
Senate. The Vice President is, ex-officio, President of the
Senate. As such, he has the casting vote in all questions
before that body. For the last twenty years, with one
exception, _he has been a slaveholder_. From the adoption of
the Constitution up to June 1842, there were 76 elections, in
the Senate, of President pro. tem. Of these the slave States
had 60 and the free States 16. Most of the 16 were in the
earlier periods of the government. Mr. Southard was elected
in 1842. Previous to that, no Northern man had received
the appointment for _thirty_ years! so careful were the
slaveholders to watch their interests by securing the casting
vote.


Senate.

For a long series of years the Senate has been equally divided
between the free and the slave States. In this condition of
it, it was a great point with the slaveholders to secure the
casting vote of the Vice Presidency, and right carefully have
they done it. This vote is of less importance now, since, by
the admission of Texas, the balance of power is broken up, and
"The Valley of Rascals," on any tie vote, now rules the Senate
and the nation.


Department of State.

The Office of Secretary of State is the most important of any,
perhaps, in the cabinet of the President. As it is the duty
of this officer to direct the correspondence with foreign
courts, instruct our foreign ministers, negotiate treaties,
&c.; his station is second only, in importance, to that of
the Presidency itself. Of the 15, who had filled this office
up to 1845, the slave States have had 10; the free States 5.
The whole number of officers in this department at Washington,
in 1846, is 86. Of these Virginia has 6 and the District of
Columbia 45.


The War Department.

In 1846, there are, at Washington, 98 officers in this
department. Of these, the District of Columbia has 49--exactly
one half, and Virginia and Maryland have the balance.

The free States generally have furnished the seamen and the
soldiers; the men to do the fighting and endure the hard
knocks, _but slavery has taken care to furnish Southern men for
officers_. Thus, of 1054 naval officers, New England has only
172; of the 68 commanders, New England has only 11; of the 328
lieutenants, New England has only 59; of the 562 midshipmen,
New England has only 82; and New England owns nearly half the
tonnage of the country. Of all the officers in the navy in
1844, whether in service or waiting orders, Pennsylvania, with
a free population more than double that of Virginia, had but
177, while Virginia had 224. In 1842, under Mr. Upshur, of 191
naval appointments, the slave States had 117; the free States
only 73.


Post Office.

The greatest opposition to cheap postage is from the South. The
reason is obvious. As multitudes of their Post-routes do not
pay for themselves, they must be paid for, through a system of
high postage, by the North, or be given up. Thus in 1842, the
deficit in the Post Office department from the slave States
was $571,000, while the excess over the expenditures in the
free States was $600,000. This went of course to make up the
deficiency of the South. So that in 1842 alone the North paid
all its own postage, and $571,000 of postage for the South. Nor
was this all. The whole number of miles of mail transportation
for 1842, was 34,835,991, at an expense of $3,087,796. Of
these miles, the mail was carried 20,331,461, at a cost of
$1,508,413, in the free States; and 14,504,530 miles, at a cost
of $1,579,383 in the slave States; that is, it cost $70,970
more to carry the mail in the slave States than in the free,
while it ran 5,826,931 miles less. Under the new system, from
official returns, presenting a comparative view of the postage
received at forty-two offices, North and South, during the
third quarter of 1844 and 1845, it appears that while the
falling off at the offices in the free States has not been one
third, that at the offices in the slave States has been more
than one half.


Civil, Diplomatic and Consular Agencies.

That most of the "spoils" of office, in these departments go to
the slaveholders is well known. The following is the Diplomatic
Agency of 1846.

FULL MINISTERS. To _Great Britain_, Louis McLane; _France_,
William R. King; _Spain_, Romulus M. Saunders; _Turkey_,
Dabney S. Carr; _Mexico_, John Slidell; _Brazil_, Henry A.
Wise;--all from slave States; and _Russia_, R. I. Ingersoll
from Connecticut.

CHARGES. _Austria_, William A. Stiles; _Holland_, Auguste
Davezac; _Belgium_, Thomas G. Glenson; _The two Sicilies_,
William H. Polk; _Sardinia_, Robert Wickliffe; _Portugal_,
Abraham Rencher; _Venezuela_, Benjamin G. Shields; _Buenos
Ayres_, George Harris; _Chili_, William Crump, all from the
slave states, and from the free States only _Denmark_, William
W. Irwin; _Sweden_, H. W. Ellsworth; _Central America_, B. W.
Bidlack; and _Peru_, A. G. Jewett.

Thus, of the seven full ministers six are from the slave
States; and of the thirteen Charges, _nine_ are from the
same; and the four given to Northern men are among the most
insignificant governments in the world. And this favoritism of
the South has been the policy for years. The civil and consular
agencies are dispensed with a like injustice to the free
States. The following, prepared by Prof. Cleveland, gives the
number of persons employed in 1845, in these several agencies,
from a few States, with their salaries, and the number of free
white inhabitants in the same.

   Free States.  | Free Pop.  | Persons | Salaries | Slave States | Free Pop. | Persons | Salaries |
  ---------------+------------+---------+----------+--------------+-----------+---------+----------+
  New York,      |  2,378,890 |    37   |  $63,250 | Virginia,    |   740,968 |    114  | $200,395
  Pennsylvania,  |  1,676,115 |    90   |  123,790 | Maryland,    |   318,204 |    133  |  170,305
  Massachusetts, |    729,030 |    43   |   86,215 | Dist. Colum.,|    30,657 |     99  |   77,455
  Ohio,          | 1,502,122  |     6   |    4,400 | Kentucky,    |   590,253 |      7  |   34,150


Presidential Electors.

During the twenty years, ending in 1832, there were six
presidential elections. In these, the South cast 608 electoral
votes, but only 41 of them for Northern candidates. During the
twenty years, ending in 1835, there were five presidential
elections, in which the South cast 515 electoral votes, only 11
of which were for Northern candidates.

In the presidential election of 1844, _thirteen_ free States
had 161 electors, and gave 1,890,884 votes--_one_ elector to
11,739 votes; while _twelve_ slave States had 105 electors and
gave 798,848 votes--_one_ elector to 6,608 votes. In other
terms; _six_ slave State votes counted as much in choice of
President and Vice President as _eleven_ free State votes. In
the same election, Michigan had 5 electors and gave 56,222
votes, or _one_ elector to 11,244 votes; while Louisiana had
6 electors and gave 26,865 votes, or _one_ elector to 4,447
votes--that is, _four_ slaveholding Louisiana votes were equal
to _eleven_ free Michigan votes.


Federal Representation.

The present number of the House of Representatives, including
Texas is 228. Of these 21 represent slave property. In fixing
the ratio of representation, after the last census, the
House adopted that of 50,179. This would have given a House
of 306 members, and the free States a majority of 68. But
a small majority is more easily managed than a large. The
Senate rejected that ratio and sent back the bill with the
ratio of 70,680. This reduced the House to 223 and brought
down the majority of the free States to the more manageable
number of 47. The effect of the odd number, 680, was to
deprive the four great States of the north, Massachusetts,
New York, Pennsylvania and Ohio, of one member each, with
no corresponding disadvantage to any slave State. Of this
proceeding, even the correspondent of the New York Herald
said,--"The Senate apportionment has robbed the North of at
least one quarter of its practical influence in the Union, when
regarded in its full extent; and the members of the free States
who voted for it, have thus surrendered the rights of their
constituents, and violated their trusts."


The House of Representatives.

The Speaker of the House has the appointment of all committees,
and of course exerts an immense influence in this, as well as
other ways, in the legislation of the country. During 31 of the
34 years, from 1811 to 1845, the speakers were all slaveholders.


Judiciary.

The Supreme Court of the United States is the court of
highest appeal in the nation. Its decision on all questions
coming before it is final. Of the 30 judges of this court,
the slave States have had 17; the free States 13. The
circuits and salaries are still more unequal and unjust.
Vermont, Connecticut, and New York, with 42 representatives
in Congress, and a free population of over _three millions_,
constitute but one circuit; while Alabama and Louisiana, with
but 11 representatives and a free population of but _half_
a _million_, constitute another. So of other circuits.
Louisiana, with a free population of 183,959, has one judge
at a salary of $3,000; Ohio, with a population of 1,519,461,
more than eight times as great as that of Louisiana, has only
one judge, at a salary of $1,000: that is, with eight times as
many people to do business for, he receives one-third as much
pay. Arkansas, with a free population of 77,639, has one judge
at a salary of $2,000; New Hampshire, with a population of
284,573, has but one judge, at a salary of $1,000. Mississippi,
with a free population of 180,440, has one judge, at a salary
of $2,500; Indiana, with a population of 685,863, has but one
judge, at a salary of $1,000--that is, two-fifths as much pay
for doing more than three times the work!


Surplus Revenue.

The Surplus Revenue, distributed by the Act of 1836, amounted
to 37,468,859 dollars. The slaveholders managed to have it
distributed, not, as it should have been, on the basis of
free population, but that of federal representation. Thereby
the South, with a free population of 3,823,289, received
$16,058,082,85, while the North, with a free population of
7,008,451, received but $21,410,777,12. So that for each
inhabitant of the _free_ North, there was received but $3,06;
while for each _free_ person in the South, there was received
$4,20; or $1,14 more for each free person in the South, than
for each free person in the North. The South, by this operation
alone, received for her slave representation in Congress,
$4,358,549!


Revolutionary War.

In this war,--New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania,--seven
States--furnished 172,436 troops and were paid for services,
$61,971,167. Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia--six States--furnished 59,335
troops, and received $52,438,130. In other terms, the Northern
States furnished about three times the number of troops and
received less than one fifth more pay. In particular States the
inequality was far greater.


The War of 1812.

The Slaveholders envied the commercial prosperity of the
North, and, to crush it, decreed the war of 1812, under the
pretence of defending "free trade and sailor's rights;" and
one hundred and thirty-seven millions of dollars were wasted
in its prosecution, and $200,000,000 more were lost on sea
and land by Northern merchants and farmers, and then, leaving
"free trade and sailor's rights" where they were before, they
made peace, and demanded a National Bank and Protective Tariff.
And in the prosecution of the war, says ALVAN STEWART, Esq,
(Address to Abolitionists Aug. 1846)--"The South placed Major
General Smyth at Buffalo, a slaveholding lawyer of Virginia;
Major General Winder, a slaveholding lawyer of Maryland, at
Forty Mile Creek, on the side of Lake Ontario; Major General
Wilkinson, a Louisiana slaveholder, at the Cedars and Rapids
of the St. Lawrence; and Major General Wade Hampton, the great
sugar boiler of Louisiana, and the largest slaveholder in the
United States, (having over 5000 crushed human beings bowing to
this monster and tyrant), was located at Burlington, Vermont,
four slaveholding Generals with their four armies, were
stretched out on our northern frontier, not to _take_ Canada,
but to prevent its being taken, by the men of New England and
New York, in 1812, '13 and '14; lest we should make some six or
eight free States from Canada, if conquered. This was treason
against Northern interests, blood and honor. This horrid
revelation could have been proved by General John Armstrong,
then Secretary of War, after he and Mr. Madison quarreled."


Florida, Florida War, Removal of the Indians.

While Florida was in possession of Spain it furnished an
asylum for slaves escaping from the contiguous States. It was
therefore bought, at the dictation of the slaveholders, at an
expense of $5,000,000. For the same purpose, and at the same
dictation the late Florida War was waged, and the native Indian
exiled. Of this, the Hon. J. R. GIDDINGS, 1845, said,--"They
(the army) captured 460 negroes, who were adjudged slaves by
staff officers of the army, to whom the duty was assigned, and
who delivered them over to interminable bondage. [See House
Doc. 52, 3d Sess. 27th Congress.] We have no means by which
we can determine the number of lives sacrificed in that war;
but it may be safely asserted, that the capture of each slave
cost the lives of two white men, and at least $80,000 in cash,
the most of which was drawn from the pockets of the people of
the free States. The whole expense of the war is estimated at
$40,000,000. The moral guilt incurred, and the sacrifice of
national character cannot be estimated. Perhaps I ought to
add, on the authority of Gen. Jessup, that bloodhounds were
also purchased to act as auxiliaries to our army, and that
bloodhounds, and soldiers, and officers, marched together under
the star-spangled banner, in pursuit of the panting fugitives
who had fled from Southern oppression. [House Doc. 125, 3d
Sess. 25th Congress.] And blood hounds, and soldiers, and
officers were paid for from the avails of Northern industry;
while our people were not permitted to petition their servants
to be relieved from such degradation." One R. Fitzpatrick was
employed to get the blood hounds. He obtained thirty-three,
and the cost, including expenses of bringing to Florida, was
$5000. The removal of the Indians from the several slave States
was merely to make room for slavery; and it has cost at least
$50,000,000, and of all these millions the North has had to pay
the largest share.


Texas and the Mexican War.

Everybody knows that Texas was annexed and that the war is
waged to extend and strengthen Slavery. The cost of these
measures is yet to be ascertained. There is little doubt that
it will exceed rather than fall short of one hundred millions.


Bank, Tariff, Southern Bankruptcy, &c.

The South originated the Bank and the Tariff. When they ceased
to work for its interests, the South abolished both. The sums
filched from the North by these changes of national polity and
by Southern bankrupts, seem almost incredible. $27,000,000, of
the capital of the United States Bank was sunk at the South.
$500,000,000, it is estimated, would not more than meet the
losses of the North, in sixty years, from Southern bankruptcy.
In fine, there is no end to these burdens--this side-wise
plunder of the free, by those whose entire life is a wholesale
plunder of the Slave. How long will freemen bear it?

    "We have a weapon firmer set
    And better than the bayonet:--
        A weapon that comes down, as still
          As snow-flakes fall upon the sod,
        But executes a freeman's will
          As lightning does the will of God;
    And from its force, nor doors nor locks
    Can shield you:--tis THE BALLOT-BOX."


SLAVEHOLDING RELIGION.


Maintaining Theological Seminaries.

The following is the conclusion of an advertisement in the
Savannah Republican of March 23, 1845:--

"Also, at the same time and place, the following negro slaves,
to wit: Charles, Peggy, Antonet, Davy, September, Maria, Jenny,
and Isaac, levied as the property of HENRY T. HALL, to satisfy
a mortgage _fi. fa._, issued out of the Supreme Court, in favor
of the _Board of Directors_ of the _Theological Seminary_ of
the SYNOD OF SOUTH CAROLINA AND GEORGIA, vs. said Henry T.
Hall. Conditions, Cash.

                                      C. O'NEAL, Sheriff M. C."


Buying Church Furniture.

A runaway slave, in 1841, assigned the following as his reason
for not communing with the church to which he belonged at
the South. "The church," said he, "had silver furniture for
the administration of the Lord's Supper, to procure which,
they _sold my brother_! and I could not bear the feelings it
produced, to go forward and receive the sacrament from the
vessels which were the purchase of my brother's blood."


Supporting Churches by Slave Jobbing.

The Rev. J. Cable, of Indiana, May 20, 1846, in a letter to the
Mercer Luminary, says:--"I have lived eight years in a slave
State, (Va.)--received my Theological education at the Union
Theological Seminary, near Hampden Sydney College. Those who
know anything about slavery, know the worst kind is jobbing
slavery--that is, the hiring out of slaves from year to year,
while the master is not present to protect them. It is the
interest of the one who hires them, to get the worth of his
money of them, and the loss is the master's if they die. What
shocked me more than anything else, was the church engaged in
this jobbing of slaves. The college church which I attended,
and which was attended by all the students of Hampden Sydney
College and Union Theological Seminary, held slaves enough to
pay their pastor, Mr. Stanton, ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS a year, of
which the church members did not pay a cent (so I understood
it). The slaves, who had been left to the church by some pious
mother in Israel, had increased so as to be a large and still
increasing fund. These were hired out on Christmas day of
each year, the day in which they celebrate the birth of our
blessed Savior, to the highest bidder. These worked hard the
whole year to pay the pastor his $1000 a year, and it was left
to the caprice of their employers whether they ever heard one
sermon for which they toiled hard the whole year to procure.
This was the church in which the professors of the seminary
and the college often officiated. Since the abolitionists have
made so much noise about the connection of the church with
slavery, the Rev. Elisha Balenter informed me the church had
sold this _property_ and put the money in _other stock_. There
were four churches near the college church, that were in the
same situation with this, when I was in that country, that
supported the pastor, in whole or in part, in the same way,
viz: Cumberland church, John Kirkpatrick, pastor; Briny church,
William Plummer, pastor, (since Dr. P. of Richmond;) Buffalo
church, Mr. Cochran, pastor; Pisga church, near the peaks of
Otter, J. Mitchell, pastor."


Selling Ministers as Slaves.

At the great Convention, at Cincinnati, in June 1845, Mr.
Needham of Louisville, Ky., said:--"Sir, in 1844, a Methodist
preacher, with regular license and certificate, was placed in
the Louisville jail, as a slave on sale. He preached in the
jail sermons which would have done credit to any white preacher
of the town. He kept a little memorandum in his pocket, in
which he marked the number of persons hopefully converted under
his preaching. I represented his case to leading Methodists in
Louisville, and showed them a copy of his papers which I had
taken. _Not one of them visited him in his prison._ He said he
forgave those who had imprisoned him and were about to sell
him. He was sold down the river, which was the last time I saw
him."


A Slaveholding D. D. whipping his "b--h" on Sabbath morning
preparatory to preaching.

March 28, 1843, in a public address at Cincinnati, the Rev.
Edward Smith, True Wesleyan, of Pittsburgh, stated that he
had lived in slave states thirty-two years; and, speaking
of a certain D. D. of his acquaintance, he adds:--"He was a
slaveholder, and a severe one, too, and often, with his own
hands, he applied the cowhide to the naked backs of his slaves.
On one occasion, a woman that served in the house, committed,
on Sabbath morning, an offence of too great magnitude to go
unpunished until Monday morning. The Dr. took his woman into
the cellar, and as is usual in such cases, stripped her from
her waist up, and then applied the lash. The woman writhed and
winced under each stroke, and cried, '_Oh Lord!_ OH LORD!!
OH LORD!!!' The Doctor stopped, and his hands fell to his
side as though struck with palsy, gazed on the woman with
astonishment, and thus addressed her, (the congregation must
pardon me for repeating his words), 'Hush, you b--h, will you
take the name of the Lord in vain on the Sabbath day?' When he
had stopped the woman from the gross profanity of crying to God
on the Sabbath day, he finished whipping her, and then went
and essayed to preach that gospel to his congregation, which
proclaims liberty to the captive and the opening of the prison
doors to them who are bound."


The Greatest Impediment.

"We are about to make an announcement," says the True American,
"which must sound very strange to those whose field of
observation is unlike our own: The greatest impediment to the
success of the Anti-Slavery movement in the slave States is,
the opposition to it of those men who profess to have been
commissioned by high Heaven to go abroad and use their efforts
for the mitigation of human misery and the extirpation of human
wrong! This assertion, which appears so monstrous, will not
surprise any one who lives among slaveholders. Our conviction
of its truth has been confirmed by extensive observation."




RELIGIOUS TESTIMONIES.


ARCHBISHOP POTTER. Some of our wise ones will have it that
_doulos_ means slave. Archbishop Potter, than whom no man was
more learned in Grecian antiquities, in his work on them,
published years ago, says, chap. 10, "Slaves, as long as they
were under the government of a master, were called _oiketdi_;
but _after their freedom_ was granted them, they were _douloi_,
not being like the former, a part of their master's estate,
but only obliged to some grateful acknowledgments and small
services, such as were required of the _Metoikoi_, to whom they
were in some few things inferior."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE YOUNGER EDWARDS, (Pastor of a church in New Haven, and
afterwards President of Union College)--"Every man who cannot
show, that his negro hath by his voluntary conduct, forfeited
his liberty, is obligated _immediately to manumit him_. And to
hold [such an one] in a state of slavery, is to be every day
guilty of robbing him of his liberty, or of _man-stealing_--and
fifty years from this time (1791) it will be as _shameful for a
man to hold a negro slave, as to be guilty of common robbery or
theft_."

       *       *       *       *       *

DR. ADAM CLARKE. "Among Christians slavery is an _enormity_,
and a _crime_ for which _perdition_ has scarcely an adequate
state of punishment."

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. ALBERT BARNES. "From the whole train of reasoning which
I have pursued, I trust it will not be considered as improper
to regard it as a position clearly demonstrated, that the fair
influence of the Christian religion would everywhere abolish
slavery. Let its principles be acted out; let its maxims
prevail and rule in the hearts of all men, and the system,
in the language of the Princeton Repertory, 'would SPEEDILY
come to an end.' In what way this is to be brought about, and
in what manner the influence of the church may be made to
bear upon it, are points on which there may be differences of
opinion. But there is one method which is obvious, and which,
if everywhere practised, would certainly lead to this result.
It is, _for the Christian church to cease all connection with
slavery_."

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. S. H. COX, D. D. "The cause of human rights is only the
converse of the cause of human duties; and how pious, or how
orthodox, or how heroic, I should like to know, is he, for
whose higher evangelical refinement of sensibility, this
subject of righteousness is too 'delicate' to be theologized
into our ethics, our creed, or our prayers? Away with such
nauseating and hypocritical affectation, in high places, and
low ones, too."--_Letter to S. J. May, Auburn, May 5, 1835._




ANTI-SLAVERY DEPOSITORY,

PUBLICATION OFFICE,

AND

FREE READING ROOM;

NO. 22 SPRUCE STREET,

(3rd door east of NASSAU STREET,)

NEW YORK.


William Harned, Publishing Agent of the American and Foreign
Anti-Slavery Society, invites the attention of the friends of
the cause in every part of the country, to the new Depository
and Publishing Office, which is centrally and pleasantly
located, and designed to afford every attainable facility for
promoting the great objects of the Society.

THE AMERICAN AND FOREIGN ANTI-SLAVERY REPORTER, edited by Rev.
A. A. Phelps, is published monthly, at 50 cents per annum, with
a material reduction to those who take several copies.

 THE READING ROOM, _free to all_, is furnished with files of all
 the Anti-Slavery papers and periodicals published in this country;
 together with a good selection of religious, literary, and political
 papers. It is also intended to establish an extensive Library of all
 works on the subject of Slavery, so far as they can be obtained.

 A DEPOSITORY for the sale of Anti-Slavery Publications has been
 established; from which it is intended that all the standard works on
 Slavery may be obtained, at wholesale and retail. In addition to such
 of the publications of the American Anti-Slavery Society as are yet in
 print, we have now on sale the following new and popular works, viz.:--

  Memoirs and Writings of Charles T. Torrey,
  Barnes on American Slavery,
  Bacon  "     "        "
  Debate between Rice and Blanchard,
  Discussion between Wayland and Fuller,
  Whittier's Poems, 4th and complete edition,
  Home, by Rev, Charles T. Torrey,
  Clarke's Liberty Minstrel, last edition,
  Narrative of Lewis and Milton Clarke,
      "     "  Frederic Douglass,
  The Slave: or, Memoirs of Archy Moore,
  Poems, by William H. Burleigh,
  Winona, the Brown Maid of the South,
  Unconstitutionality of Slavery, by Spooner, both editions,
  Sinfulness of Slavery, by James G. Birney,
  Slavery, and the Slaveholders' Religion, by Brooke,
  A Reproof of the American Church,
  Condensed Bible Argument, by a Virginian,
  Alvan Stewart's Legal Argument,
  Address of the Cincinnati Liberty Convention,
  An Appeal for the Bondwoman, a Poem by E. Lloyd,
  The American Board and Slaveholding, by Rev. W. W. Patton,
  German Anti-Slavery Almanac for 1847, &c. &c.

---> Address all orders for the Reporter, Books, &c. postpaid,
to

                     WILLIAM HARNED, 5 Spruce Street, New York.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

Obvious printer's errors corrected, including unambiguous
typos, spellings corrected to match standard spelling at time
of publication, missing but implied quote marks, and the like.

On the final page, a small finger pointing to the right has
been replaced with "--->".

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully
as possible, including non-standard punctuation, inconsistently
hyphenated words, and other inconsistencies.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FACTS FOR THE PEOPLE OF THE FREE
STATES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.The Project Gutenberg eBook of Once Upon a Monbeast..., by Charles E.
Fritch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Once Upon a Monbeast...

Author: Charles E. Fritch

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65772]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONCE UPON A MONBEAST... ***





                        ONCE UPON A MONBEAST...

                         By Charles E. Fritch

               Pity the poor science-fiction writer who
             creates bug-eyed monsters. You only see them
             in print--he may have to live with a few!...

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                              March 1952
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


That's not my real name up there, and in a little while you'll discover
the reason why. If you read my real name attached to this, you'd think
it was just another fantastic yarn I batted out and then you'd forget
it. And you'd laugh. You'll probably laugh anyway--for awhile--but I've
got to get this thing off my chest once and for all.

I was a struggling science-fiction author at the time it began--or
rather, just before it began. Nope, that's not right--struggling isn't
the word; it doesn't express the blood, sweat and postage stamps that
went into a creation, the hope and the futility that ran hot and cold
with each morning's mail, the psychological and financial insecurity
that comes to a beginner crazy enough to tackle such a field. And then,
to top it off, I got a letter from Donald MacDonald.

That's not _his_ real name either, and in a little while you'll find
out the reason why. He's one of the all-time greats in science-fiction
and still is, and a fan not knowing his work would be suspected of
having lost his marbles. So a "name" author writes me a letter. Great,
huh?

No.

I'd sent MacDonald a batch of my manuscripts, humbly asking the great
man to favor them with a glance if a moment ever came while he was
resting a bit between dashing off novelettes. And would he kindly
let me know--frankly, honestly, without fear of injuring my delicate
feelings--what he thought of the work?

He would. And did. The letter read:

    Dear Mr. ....:

    I appreciate your efforts at trying to crack the stf field, but I'm
    afraid I'll have to disillusion you. I have read your manuscripts
    with considerable care and am sorry to report that you seem to have
    no talent for writing and especially none for science-fiction.

    I would suggest you turn your energies to something else--saxophone
    playing, stamp collecting--anything else. If you insist upon
    writing, however, have you considered fillers?

                                                           Best wishes,
                                                      Donald MacDonald.

What I should have done was go out into the country, and let the
gathering steam blow its lid. But I didn't. If I'd gotten an automobile
in motion, I would have run down the nearest boy scout just to see his
blood spatter. Instead, I sat down and wrote a letter to Mr. Donald
MacDonald.

It was a fine letter, full of colorful phrases and split infinitives.
To hell with grammar at a time like that, I rationalized. I told him in
no uncertain terms just what I thought of him and his criticisms. I'd
be a science-fiction writer just to show him up for the incompetent he
was, I said. I guess I said a lot of things. It was a letter full of
more than fire and brimstone. It was radioactive.

I mailed it. Then I had a beer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two days later, while I was bravely punching typewriter keys in a
desperate effort to make good my boast, a small, haggard-looking fellow
came to the door and rang the bell.

"We don't want any," I said.

He peered through the screen door and said, "I'm MacDonald," in a
nervous, uncertain voice.

"MacDonald who?"

"Donald MacDonald. May I come in?"

"You're kidding. No, by God, you're not. You _are_ Donald MacDonald."

He smiled wanly. "May I come in? I flew all the way--"

"Just to see me?"

"I--er--it was no trouble. I took a _skyorie_."

"A what?"

"May I come in?"

"Sure, sure, c'mon in. Have a chair. Drink?"

"No, thanks," he said, seating himself. "I'm afraid I've been--that
is--er--No, I don't believe so."

"I got your letter," I said, suddenly remembering. My awe at the
presence of the great man was suddenly overwhelmed by a feeling of
"Now, what the hell does he want?"

"And I got yours," MacDonald said. "That's why I'm here." He gazed at
my typewriter as though it were ready to bite him. "You didn't take my
advice?"

"Hardly," I said, rather flippantly. "Once the bug has bitten you--"

"Have you had anything accepted?"

I stared at the rug, hating the man for asking. "No, not yet," I
admitted grudgingly, "but--"

"Then the bug hasn't _really_ bitten you yet," he said. "You'll know it
when he does."

"I--uh--guess my letter was a bit--er--abrupt," I said, not knowing how
else to fill the silence.

"You were pretty mad," he admitted, "and I don't blame you; I should
have known better than to tell you that way. But in this game,
you've--well, you've got to learn to take criticism. If your work's
bad, admit it and throw in the towel."

"And mine's bad?"

He shrugged, avoiding my eyes. "I'm afraid so."

But the steam had been released and the period of mourning had ended,
so "I'll improve," I told him.

"You're wasting your time."

"Possibly. What I can't understand, though, is why a big name in
science-fiction comes way the devil out here just to advise me to stop
knocking my head against a wall."

"Perhaps more than your head is at stake," he said.

"What?"

"Nothing," he said hastily. For a moment his pale face held a haunted
look, and he rose, looking like a man unsure of himself. "I can't talk
you out of it, so I'd better go."

"Wait a minute. Just what did you mean by that other remark?"

Donald MacDonald glanced around him as though he were afraid invisible
beings might be eavesdropping. "You really want to know the reason why?"

I nodded.

"Your work is good," he said seriously. "Too good. Not up to par on
some points, but in a few years you'll be going places. That's why I
sneaked away from them and came here--to beg you to reconsider, to stop
this writing now, before it's too late."

"You mean--you _can't_ mean--you're not--afraid of competition?"

He waved an annoyed hand. "Competition, hell! There's always room for
more. You don't understand," he went on, screwing his face into a look
of determination. "I'm trying to save your peace of mind, your sanity
perhaps. The mind is a great and powerful thing, sometimes dangerous.
All these things--these alien creatures that a science-fiction author
creates--"

"Yes?"

But he had straightened suddenly, a look of terror on a face gone
ashen. He went to the door like a man being pushed, fumbled for the
knob. "I beg of you, for your sake, forget it," he called back. Then he
was gone.

I went out on the porch but MacDonald was not in sight. I heard a
strange noise as of the flapping of great leathery wings. A shadow
passed across the lawn. I looked up.

Nothing.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning I got a small envelope in the mail. The letter inside
read, "Enclosed is a check for your story THE MONBEAST...." I sank into
the softest chair in the world and read those wonderful, wonderful
words, and held the check in my hand and read those wonderful,
wonderful figures. I was so in a trance I hardly noticed the tiny
decimal point that scampered on tiny legs across the check. I hardly
felt the small, sharp bite--but....

My first acceptance! It was incredible the exhilaration that flowed
through me in that instant. It was like a much-needed shot of
adrenaline, like cool springwater to a thirsty man. I had a check for
a story someone thought enough of to publish. I was an author. A real,
live, honest-to-goodness author with a check in my hand to prove to a
critical world that I wasn't a bum after all. Suddenly the world was a
big, wide, wonderful place to live in, and I loved everyone in it--even
the poor, disillusioned Donald MacDonald.

But why stop here? I thought. There were more checks where that came
from. If I could sell one story, I could sell two, and then three, and
four. So I did. In a way, it was something like digging my own grave.
You don't understand that now, but in a little while you'll see the
reason why.

       *       *       *       *       *

After I had haunted the newsstand for about three months, the great day
came. THE MONBEAST was the last story in the magazine (at the time I
thought they really should have featured it) and my name was misspelled
on the contents page, but it was a great day just the same. A day of
triumph. A day for rejoicing. I'd had several stories accepted during
the several months' interval, but this was the day that the fruits of
my labor became evident to the world.

I walked home with a proud, firm step, casually displaying the magazine
to the vast public eye, to friend and foe alike. I tried to act
nonchalant, as though this were old stuff to an established writer like
me. It was a day of glory, of triumph, rivaling Caesar's victorious
march into Rome.

That evening I read the story over and over again, marveling at the
perfection of its form, savoring the exquisite flavor of each delicate,
richly-hued, word, the uniqueness of each choice, well-turned phrase. I
fell asleep with the magazine in my hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning the monbeast was sitting at the foot of my bed.

"Okay, okay," it said, blinking its bug-eyes at me, "don't act so
surprised. MacDonald warned you, didn't he?"

"But--but--"

"Sure, I'm real," the monbeast volunteered, scratching its scaly head
with a long-nailed finger. "That's the trouble with you guys. You're
full of imagination, but you can't face reality."

"Where--where'd you come from?"

The monbeast shrugged massive green shoulders. "The whole thing's much
too technical for me to worry about. All I know is us BEMs exist, and
we get to your dimension via science-fiction."

"That 'power of mind' MacDonald was talking about?" I said, shuddering
a bit.

"Something like that. Other forms of fiction deal with things native to
your world. Science-fiction regards us BEMs as real, so while we don't
ordinarily exist here, there's a stress created in the barrier between
us, and we come through."

"Then you're really real?"

"Practically. Right now, though, you're the only one who can see and
hear me. You haven't characterized me sufficiently so that the readers
will be convinced that I'm real. But that's okay. You'll improve."

"Thanks. But now what about you?" I said, trying to not appear
overanxious. "Are you returning to your own dimension or are you
staying here for awhile?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The monbeast grinned, showing the eighty sharp-pointed teeth I knew it
possessed. "Sorry, I'm here to stay. I'm your brainchild, you know, so
I'll have to stick to you."

I gulped. "Stick to me?"

"Only figuratively," the monbeast said. "But I'll be around." He
cocked a bug-eye at me and said gravely, "We'd better get a few things
straight right from the start. One of them is that as far as you're
concerned, I'm as real as that bedpost."

"Real?" I tried to laugh that off, but the sound came out a little
weakly. "That's silly. You're just a product of my imagination."

"Am I?" the monbeast said.

He thrust the scaly face close to mine and yawned. Suddenly the room
became a turkish bath.

"Okay, okay," I said hastily, "turn it off."

Coolness came, and I breathed easier as the steam dissipated.

"Secondly, you're going to create bigger and better BEMs and make them
more convincing," the monbeast continued. "With all you writers turning
us loose, we can have a swell time in this world."

"But how can you?" I protested. "You said the readers wouldn't believe
in you, so you don't exist for them."

"Science-fiction is growing," the monbeast said. "Everyday more people
are getting to realize that there is more to the world than those
things they see around them. They believe what they read in love
stories and detective stories. Science-fiction is next."

"Suppose I don't want to create more BEMs?" I said. "Suppose I take up
saxophone playing or something and leave science-fiction alone."

"You can't stop writing it now, any more than a true fan can stop
reading it. The bug has bitten you." He smiled a piano keyboard of
teeth and continued, "Besides, I could be obliged to--er--inspire you
just a bit. But you just work along with me, and we'll both do fine."

So we did.

       *       *       *       *       *

The monbeast isn't such a bad fellow after all, once you get to know
him. Neither are the other BEMs hanging around my house. Oh, yes, there
are others, lots of them. Hanging from the rafters. Under chairs. In
coffee cups. Everywhere. It's an occupational hazard, you know.

Chances are, though, you wouldn't be able to see them--unless you're a
real gone science-fiction fan, and even then maybe not. But someday you
will.

Someday you'll be sitting in your favorite chair reading your favorite
science-fiction magazine, and you'll look up....

Maybe it'll be sitting on the desk beside you, running one of four
hands through a nest of snakes on its scaly head. Maybe it'll be only
an inch tall and perched on the piano watching you. Maybe at first
it'll be just a warm, dank breath on the back of your neck.

No telling _when_ it'll be either. Maybe next year, next month;
tomorrow. Who knows--perhaps even now.

Here's a little tip. When you lay down this magazine, turn around
slowly. Have you ever had the feeling that something was going on
behind your back but when you turned around you saw nothing? What's
that? You think maybe you've got that feeling right now?

Listen, on second thought, now that you know, maybe you better not turn
around. Take this as a gag. A nice big laugh. You'll be a lot better
off that way.

What you don't know can't hurt you....

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ONCE UPON A MONBEAST... ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Yachting Party, by Fox B. Holden

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Yachting Party

Author: Fox B. Holden

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65771]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YACHTING PARTY ***




                            YACHTING PARTY

                           By Fox B. Holden

             While their crew worked feverishly to repair
          the damaged rocket ship, the passengers set out to
          explore the planet. Thus they met the Hairy One....

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                             January 1952
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The girl, Marla, trembled, yet she was not afraid. Ronal had told her
at the outset of the cruise that although Krist's friend Logan was
young for a space pilot, he was a good one, and had trained in the old
fuel-propelled ships that men had first flown Space in before the new
warp-drive had been perfected. But Logan was sweating visibly.

The blue planet loomed up, and Krist, who owned the trim Space-yacht
and had suggested the cruise, jumped noticeably when the first shrill
whistle of atmospheric resistance pierced the tense quiet of the
well-appointed control-room.

They were half-falling, half-gliding downward, and despite Logan's
attempts to check their descent with the clogged free-drive maneuvering
jets, their downward speed seemed to increase each second.

"My fault," Ronal muttered so only Marla could hear. "Had we stayed on
the warp we charted and not followed my suggestion to go adventuring on
free-drive in some system none of us have ever heard of, we wouldn't be
in this mess."

"Not your fault, dear," Marla said to her husband. "Even Logan couldn't
have known the free-drive would fail and leave us too far from our
warp-point to make it back, and--"

The stricken craft lurched again, and the polished nose began an almost
imperceptible up-swing. The shrill scream of the rarefied atmosphere
began descending the scale like a gigantic siren running down.

"Flat on the deck!" Krist yelled.

Lush, green forests stretched but scant miles below. The sound of a
heavy, rich atmosphere now racing past their gleaming hull dropped to a
low, moaning note and then the sound of it was gone.

The nose came up.

There was a wrenching jar and the nerve-shattering cry of tearing,
scorched metal. The control-room rocked crazily, then was suddenly
still, cocked at a nightmare angle, as a shuddering impact brought the
wildly slewing craft to a punishing halt.

And for the four of them, there was sudden oblivion....

"Marla was as lucky as the rest of us," Ronal said. "Just the wind
knocked out of her. She's coming around." The girl's silver-flecked
eyes were already open and for a moment there was forgetfulness in
them. "We splattered a little," Ronal told her. "You move all right?"

She was shaken, but unhurt. He helped her to a standing position on the
canted deck, and saw that Krist and Logan were already taking a rapid
inventory of the yacht's available tools.

"Got to look around outside," Logan was saying, shaking his bruised
head a little, "before I can tell you how bad we are. But I think
Krist and I can get her back into one piece."

"Can if we can go out," the tall, athletic-looking owner of the
pleasure craft said. "We'll need the suits."

"Maybe not," Ronal said. "There was plenty of atmosphere wailing away--"

"Five credits gets you 20 it's all pure poison," Logan retorted. He
was standing at one of the metalo-glass ports, surveying the colorful
terrain speculatively. They joined him.

The ship had hit in an oblong clearing, perhaps five miles in length
and half that in width. Surrounding the open, grassy spot were the
depths of an untamed, riotously colored jungle.

"I'll give it a try in a suit," Logan said. "The sooner we patch up and
get out of here the better. No telling what's in that." He gestured
toward the clearing's mile-distant edge.

Ronal helped him into the bundlesome plasti-seal space-suit, then
watched tensely with the others as the starboard airlock hissed, and
Logan stepped onto the thickly-carpeted clearing floor.

"He's a cool kid," Ronal said. "For all we know, he's just--"

"He's a cracker-jack mechanic," Krist interrupted. "If we've got a
couple of straight rivets left, he'll get us out of here. I'm just glad
that he picked out this planet to come in on instead of the first or
second out from this system's sun. It's plenty hot even here." They
were all perspiring freely; the atmosphere conditioner had ceased
operating from the shock of landing.

Logan's voice cracked from the still-functioning communications panel.

"Not too bad. Forehull plates got a little bashed in--couple of rips in
the speed-skin. Take us maybe four, five days to get her Space-worthy
again. Can unclog the free-drive jets in a day easy. But the guy who
thought of leaving modern yachts equipped with free-drive units oughtta
be hung from a comet tail."

       *       *       *       *       *

They could see Logan near the nose of the ship. His hands were working
at his helmet.

"Take it easy!" Krist called. They could hear a soft hiss in the
intercom.

"Letting some of this stuff in, a cubic millimeter at a time, grandma!
If I can breathe it, I'll let you know. If I can't--Anyway, if we can
work without the suits, it'll get us out of here that much sooner.
Don't know about you kids, but I didn't even bring a sling-shot
along...."

Krist traded looks with Ronal. There wasn't so much as a hand-gun in
the whole ship. Neither said what was in his mind but Ronal drew Marla
a little closer and broke the silence.

"You'd think they'd equip even pleasure craft with a few of these
scientific gadgets you hear about, instead of taking up room with a
lot of old-fashioned fuel tanks and jets that nobody needs. With an
atmosphere or gravity tester things like this would be a lot less
risky. Got to admire Logan's nerve."

"He's got his suit off!"

It was true. Logan was walking slowly, experimentally about, eyeing
the surrounding terrain to estimate their situation, unhampered by the
suit. He moved slowly, but not laboredly.

"Let's get some tools out there!" Ronal said. "The three of us can--"

"There's only the emergency kit. Tools enough for two, working
simultaneously. You better stick with Marla, Ronal, and both of you
can keep a weather-eye out for--anything--while we're putting this egg
together again."

"How about trying to contact some Stellar Patrol outpost? They--"

"No good. We're way off our warp. Even if we had the power, it'd take
our beam, like our ship if it had enough free-drive fuel--about eighty
thousand years to reach the nearest one. Remember, kid, we had warped
some fifty thousand light-years out before you talked Logan into
leaving the warp to fool around in free Space for awhile. Until we can
jet our way back to warp-point, we can forget about communication."

Ronal understood too clearly what Krist was talking about. Travel
in "free" Space, the ordinary three-dimensional kind, was measured
in miles; warp-travel was measured in parsecs. "Free" speed, with
old-fashioned fuel-eating jets which were supposed to be carried as
emergency power units only, was forty thousand miles a second at
best--warp-speed, depending on the dimension you used, had a top of
better than a thousand light-years a minute. Leaving your warp to poke
around in ordinary three-dimensional Space on jets was like leaving
your surface-car parked on a speedway to hike up a side-road on foot.
You had to get back to the speedway to get home. And if you broke a
leg--

       *       *       *       *       *

Krist was already outside, lugging tool-carriers to a spot Logan had
selected to begin. Ronal turned to his wife.

"Well, we can't keep a weather-eye out for bug-eyed monsters in here,"
he said. "Might as well go brave the Great Unknown ourselves. C'mon!"

The heavy grass was wet and soft beneath their feet, and had a
distinctive aroma of its own. Ronal thought to himself as they walked
that perhaps the red, desert covered fourth planet would have been a
better bet after all--at least cooler.

"We shouldn't get too far from the ship," Marla said.

"We won't. But I just want to look around--want a closer look at the
jungle from the edge of the clearing. Always wanted to be able to tell
people I'd been exploring on some strange, exotic planet somewhere--"

"It's strange enough. But quiet up to now, anyway. Maybe all that--"

They had reached the clearing's edge.

And saw the Hairy One for the first time.

Marla stopped in mid-sentence, and they stood transfixed.

The Hairy One regarded them evenly with small, narrowly-spaced black
eyes. He remained as immobile as the two from the ship.

"Like a man, but smaller," Marla whispered tautly.

"But covered with hair! And on all fours," Ronal said. Marla started to
speak again, but he silenced her with a nervous gesture. The ape-like
creature cocked its head, as though listening. A light breeze made
ripples in the thick hair on his narrow, sloping back, but for long
moments he did not stir, nor did Marla or Ronal advance toward him.

The Hairy One fixed his gaze on Marla, then shifted it to her husband.
Then, as though at a signal, he turned abruptly and shambled off into
the dense undergrowth at a rapid pace without so much as a backward
glance.

"Better be on our way back," Ronal said. "If he's displeased with us,
he'll have his whole tribe on our necks."

To run a mile's distance had never been difficult for either the man or
woman before, but on this lush planet with its heavy, sweet atmosphere
and slightly greater gravity than that of their own home sphere, it
seemed to both that the distance between them and the ship would never
be covered. Ronal glanced over his shoulder twice as they ran, but
there were no signs of activity at the jungle's edge. But the heavy
foliage would make perfect camouflage for an entire army....

       *       *       *       *       *

Krist dogged the airlock shut. "The best bet," he said, "is to barge
right in and let them all see us. If we can let them know, or get them
to understand, that we're weaponless and harmless, they won't attack."

"That would only work if their thinking is based on our system of
logic," Logan said. "We don't know that it is. It could easily be
suicide to step one inch inside that seething tangle."

"But you've both missed the big point," Ronal said. "I doubt very much
if he, or they can 'think' at all as we know thought. He is no more
than a beast--a jungle beast, and would behave according to what I've
read is the first law of the wild--exterminate the intruder to protect
yourself. And I think if he and his kind did attack, it would be under
cover of darkness."

"He might've killed us both an hour ago," Marla said then. "But he
didn't. He showed no sign of hostility."

"She's right on that," Ronal admitted. "He ran!"

There was silence for a moment, and then Logan spoke again.

"We could go on like this for hours and get nowhere. Hours that could
be a lot better spent. We know nothing of the situation on this planet
beyond the hull of our own ship. I think our best protection is
completing repairs as quickly as possible and getting out. Ronal and
Marla can still keep an eye out. If anything happens, we can always get
into the ship before they reach us. We'll all have to remain within the
ship at night, of course. And without any weapons, that's all there is
to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the days of feverish work that followed, the life that they all
could feel was teeming within the hot, moist jungle that surrounded
them gave little hint of its presence save for an occasional beast-like
scream and the cries of birds. And the nights were quiet save for the
sound of warm breezes riffling their way through lush foliage.

"But I can feel a thousand eyes upon us for every move we make," Marla
said.

"It'll be all over in a day or so," Ronal reassured her. "Logan says
that we'll be able to blast off without even trying to shift the
ship's position. Chances are we won't even set eyes on our hairy
friend again, much less any of his tribesmen. Don't worry."

But it was the next morning that they saw the Hairy One again.

"He's trying to get up into that tree with the fruit on it," Marla
said, "but the trunk's too big around for him to climb, and the lowest
branch is too high for him to reach."

"He seems to be alone," Ronal said.

"And he doesn't even seem to know we're still here."

"I wonder if he really cares," Ronal said, and began walking slowly
toward the clearing's edge.

"You aren't going to--"

"Got a funny feeling. And I want a closer look. He could get that
fruit, if--"

"If he could _stand_!" Marla completed. The implications of what Ronal
suggested came fully upon her for the first time. Quite evidently, she
understood now, the all-fours attitude of the Hairy One was not just
for ease of jungle travel. It was a permanent attitude because the
beast had not yet attained the ability to stand erect!

"I've an idea," Ronal said. He quickened his stride. "But you'd better
go back with Krist and Logan. It's possible that--"

"I will not! And what danger is there? For nearly a week we've been
here, and although we've all felt uneasy, this is the first we've seen
him since that first day. There hasn't been even a hint of hostility.
What more can he be than just a harmless, stupid beast?"

The Hairy One halted his tree-climbing efforts when he saw them,
but made no move to either retreat or advance. As before, he stood
immobile and watched. Ronal and Marla approached with the palms of
their hands opened and outward, hanging limply at their sides. And as
they approached, Ronal swept the jungle edge with his eyes, to peer as
deeply into its tangled growth as he could. Nothing moved.

Within scant yards of the beast, they stopped.

The Hairy One was watching Marla.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ronal dropped to all fours. And it was a peculiar, silent melodrama
that followed then. A highly-cultured man from a well-ordered,
civilized galaxy, making a crude attempt to teach a beast to walk, on
the face of a planet which, but a few days before, he had never known
existed.

Why? Marla wondered. What fascination had there always been between
alien cultures, that had always made one attempt to instruct the
other in its ways? Certainly Ronal was no scientist, no explorer.
Yet, as though he were an appointed ambassador of his own kind, he
was attempting the always risky job of finding a common level of
understanding with an alien mind.

Or perhaps it was just natural curiosity, and an overabundance of
self-confidence!

Ronal had imitated the creature's all-fours shamble until he was
beneath the tree limb.

"Careful," Marla said. "Don't give him the idea you're trying to steal
his fruit, or we will be in trouble."

Far out from where the fruit hung, Ronal stood up slowly. Then he
raised his arms, opened his hands, touched the limb with his fingers.

Then he dropped back to the all-fours position, and repeated the
standing up process.

Then at length, he pointed to the Hairy One, to the position under the
limb above which the fruit swung, and backed slowly to where Marla
stood, fascination in her eyes.

The Hairy One remained immobile. There seemed no flicker of
comprehension in his flat, black eyes. Then suddenly, for the quickest
flash of an instant, he came almost erect, his arms half upraised!

Then he dropped back, as though exhausted and baffled by the effort.

"He did it!" Ronal exclaimed. "He can understand!"

Ronal went through the weird pantomime again, but although the Hairy
One stood once again and even accomplished two staggering steps
forward, he dropped back once more without having reached the fruit.

"We had better go back," Marla said. "He--it--I don't think you
should've, Ronal."

"No harm done. But before we give up my little experiment--"

Ronal reached up, plucked the fruit and in one fluid motion tossed it
to the Hairy One. And deftly, it was caught!

And as quickly thrown forcefully to the ground!

"You've angered him, Ronal! You've--"

"But he could see I wasn't stealing it--"

The Hairy One did not move. Crouched, he watched them; watched Marla.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly, Ronal was clearing a small area of the thick, carpet-like
grass. Then in the soft, rich dirt which he had exposed, he began
making swift, simple diagrams. They depicted the ship, surrounded by a
forest. Then, pointing first to his crude drawing, then to the Hairy
One, to themselves, then to the ship, Ronal waited.

But the beast did not move.

"Take him along? Back with us?" Marla whispered.

"Why not?" Ronal answered. "If our experts could communicate with him,
or at least study him, there's no telling--wait!"

The Hairy One had started to stand, step forward, then stopped.

"We had better go, Ronal." Marla was frightened, now. "You've made him
resent us. We should leave him to this world where he belongs, and we
should return to ours where we belong."

"One more try. Then, if it doesn't work--"

Ronal, almost as though caught in a trance, began to take a slow,
cautious step toward the immobile beast before him. And stepped back
quickly!

For the Hairy One had in an instant grabbed from the ground a heavy,
club-like stick! Yet he had not raised it, but merely held it
meaningfully, pointed downward.

Ronal stood motionless. The Hairy One watched Marla, then Ronal. Then
he dropped his club, silently picked up the fruit he had thrown to the
ground, and turned. Then he vanished once more into the jungle.

       *       *       *       *       *

A day later, for merely a moment before Logan punched the acceleration
warning buzzer for take-off and switched on the jet detonators, they
saw the Hairy One for the last time.

"Look, Krist! Marla! There he is! And by Betelgeuse if he isn't
_standing up_!"

Even at a mile distance they could discern the erect figure of the
mute, enigmatic denizen of this strange, new planet--immobile,
watching, but on two feet.

"And on those forelegs of his were more hands than feet--and what
someday might be a thumb, to oppose his fingers!" Ronal was saying
quietly.

Marla and Krist knew what was in Ronal's mind. And Marla was glad they
were about to blast off. There had been something in the way the beast
had watched them, had watched her--

They knew what Ronal was thinking. But it was all they would ever know.

They took their places in the acceleration hammocks.

Seconds later, with a great, shuddering roar, the gleaming Space-yacht
leaped skyward and disappeared into the blue vault of the sky.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Hairy One watched for minutes afterward, then dropped back to all
fours and shambled through the jungle. His legs hurt strangely, and his
arms--_

_Perhaps he should have accepted their offer and gone with them to
their bright, shining world._

_Or, perhaps, taken the woman and started--started what? He could not
remember._

_He stumbled awkwardly into the overgrown ruin of shattered masonry and
twisted steel wherein he slept, and laid down._

_He felt very tired._


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YACHTING PARTY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Killer, by J. T. Oliver

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Killer

Author: J. T. Oliver

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65770]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KILLER ***




                              THE KILLER

                            By J. T. Oliver

                Smith made a profitable business out of
             murder. It was all quite simple--he killed a
              man and then disposed of the body--forever!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                              March 1952
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The sign on the door said Ernest H. Smith, Private Investigator.
The door opened and a woman came in. She was a brunette, about
five-feet-two, wearing a yellow dress with black buttons. She carried a
brown alligator handbag. "I am Mrs. Wilma Rogers," she said. "You were
recommended to me."

Smith motioned to a chair in front of his desk. "Sit down, Mrs. Rogers.
Do you have a card?"

She sat down and opened her handbag. She took out a small card and
handed it to him. He looked at the printed words, "Recommended to
Smith." He opened a desk drawer and removed a small bottle of red
liquid, spilling a few drops on the blank side of the card. Soon there
was visible writing on it. "Okay for any service," it said.

"All right," Smith nodded, "what can I do for you?"

"I want you to kill my husband," she said pleasantly.

Smith swiveled his chair around to face the typewriter, inserted a
blank sheet of white paper, and began to type. "Why do you want him
killed?"

"He's stingy--he won't give me enough money."

"How much money will he leave you, Mrs. Rogers?"

"Roughly two hundred thousand," she said. "There's insurance, of
course, but I understand we can't count on that."

Smith smiled. "That's a nice sum. Now what time would be most
convenient?"

She shrugged her shoulders. "Any time suits me."

Smith laughed. "I mean for your husband. What time would be best for
killing him?"

"Oh," she said. Her brow wrinkled and she began to mutter, "Let's see,
now ... home at five-fifteen, reads the paper ... takes a shower ...
dinner at six-fifteen ... I can send the servants out at
seven-thirty ... oh, I think eight will be perfect."

"Eight it is," said Smith, putting the information on paper. "Now for a
bit of information about the house and grounds. Can't afford to bungle
into the wrong place and foul up the job."

Mrs. Rogers opened her purse again and withdrew a folded sheet of
paper. "I've got a floor-plan of the house here, with the address and
everything marked off."

Smith took the paper and looked at it. "You don't overlook anything, do
you? Why didn't you just go ahead and do the job yourself?"

She smiled and shrugged. "I understand you can perform a perfect
murder. I'm afraid I couldn't."

Smith removed the typewritten sheet from the machine and inserted a
fresh sheet. He filled it in with names, dates, and figures. When he
finished he handed it to her. "Sign on the bottom line."

She took the paper and looked at it.

"It's our contract," said Smith. "I have to have a guarantee that
you'll go through with your part of the bargain. If you don't, I'll
have that signed confession."

Mrs. Rogers looked at him in silence for a moment, then she laughed and
signed the paper. "You don't overlook anything, yourself."

"No, Ma'am," said Smith.

       *       *       *       *       *

At exactly five minutes before eight, Smith drove his panel truck
through the gate to the Rogers home, turned out the lights, and drove
silently to the house. He parked near the side entrance, got out, went
around the truck, which was labeled, "Smith's TV Repair," and opened
the back doors. He lifted a pile of ragged quilts from the floor and
picked up a small air-pistol. Wrapped carefully in the quilts was a
tiny bottle of dark green liquid, marked "Poison." He took a small
dart from his pocket, opened the bottle and applied a small amount of
the liquid to the tip of the projectile. Then he loaded the pistol with
the dart, stuck it in his coat pocket, and replaced the bottle.

He walked rapidly to the door of the house, stopped at the steps to
consult the floor-plan, and then entered. He went up the stairs and
directly to the second door on the left. He turned the knob silently
and eased inside.

A small man, dressed in a dark suit, was seated at a desk, writing with
a fountain pen on light blue paper. He looked up and said, "Who are
you?"

"I'm Smith, the TV repairman--are you Rogers?"

"Yes, but I--"

Then Smith killed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He emerged from the house with Rogers draped over his shoulder and
staggered over to the truck. He shoved the corpse in and crawled in
after. Moving rapidly, he opened the door of a trim metal cabinet
directly behind the cab and shoved Rogers inside. Then he pushed a
button on the side of the contraption and it began to hum.

After two minutes he cut the power and opened the cabinet. It was empty.

Smith whistled softly as he walked back to the house. He strode noisily
in and called, "Hey, Mrs. Rogers!"

She emerged from a door near the head of the stairs and came down.
"Yes?" she said.

Smith grinned at her. "It's okay, lady--the job is over."

"Good! Let me fix you a drink, and you can tell me all about it."

Smith sat down on a couch. She prepared the drinks and brought his
over. They sat together and sipped the liquor.

"Science is wonderful," she said.

"Yeah, it sure is," said Smith. "They spend millions figuring out fancy
ways to catch crooks, and then some dumb professor invents a way so I
can kill people and never be caught."

"I wonder what the cops a hundred years in the future will think when
bodies start popping up all over the place?" she observed.

"Who cares?" said Smith. "I'm making my dough, even if I will have to
wait seven years for the heirs to collect."

"It won't be too hard to wait," she said, "since we know for certain
we'll get it."

"Let's drink to our success," Smith said.

"Let's," she smiled.

"Here's to a fine old professor, who invented a time machine and
kindly let me kill him and take it away. Here's to a policeman's
nightmare--the perfect murder."

They drank.

Smith got to his feet then and put the glass down. "Well, I've got to
go now, I--"

He saw the blank look of astonishment on her face. Her mouth had
dropped open and her eyes were wide, staring. But they weren't looking
at him--they were looking _behind_ him.

And then he heard the polite cough.

Smith spun around. He stared in amazement at the figure of a man
standing there. A man clad in a strange shimmering metallic uniform.
The man held an odd-looking weapon in his hand. He was smiling.

"Mr. Smith, I believe?"

Smith nodded automatically. "Yes, but who--"

"--am I?" the stranger completed the sentence for him. "It's quite
simple. I'm Inspector Graevod, homicide. I'm arresting you for murder."

Smith shook his head dully. "But that's impossible. There's no
murder--no body.... Where did you come from?"

The shimmering man smiled pleasantly. "Oh but there is a body. Matter
of fact there are quite a few. We've had quite a bit of difficulty in
tracing you down. I've come all the way from 2035 to find you." He
turned his eyes to the woman. "As an accessory to the fact you are also
under arrest. Come along, both of you."

He pointed the strange weapon at them and a silver radiance swept from
it to envelope their bodies.

But only for a moment. Then they were gone....

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KILLER ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Return Engagement, by Margaret St. Clair

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Return Engagement

Author: Margaret St. Clair

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65769]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RETURN ENGAGEMENT ***




                           RETURN ENGAGEMENT

                         By Margaret St. Clair

               The Earthman made the mistake of breaking
             a law on the alien world. Naturally he had to
             be chastised--in a manner to suit the aliens!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                             January 1952
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


"The ingratitude of humans," McBream said broodingly, "is amazing.
Loan a Martian a couple of I.U.'s when he's in a spot, and he'll send
you greeting cards on the anniversary for the rest of his life. Fish
a terrestrial out of the water when he's drowning, and he sends you
a bill from the tailor for resurfacin' his suit. Passengers!" McBream
spat in the direction of the lucite cuspidor.

I picked up the book from McBream's desk and examined it. It was
beautifully printed on outsize sheets of silky preemitex, and bound in
smooth, deep-garnet Vellumium. On the spine of the book, in shining
miraloy, ran the words, FARQUARSON'S ENCHIRIDION OF EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL
COOKERY.

"This what you're so sore about?" I asked.

"Sore?" McBream snorted. "Who's sore? Only petty, small-souled
individuals get sore at things. Me, I'm suffering from an attack of
righteous wrath. I'm not vindictive, but I hope Farquarson chokes over
one of his own recipes."

"The name sounds familiar," I ventured.

"It should be. Farquarson is culinary editor of _Pro Homine_, the
super-sharp magazine for men. You must have heard of him. That book
in your hand is supposed to be his masterpiece. Masterpiece!" McBream
snorted again.

"It isn't as though he hadn't plenty of room for it," my friend
continued in an aggrieved tone after a silence. "The first ten pages
of the book are taken up with acknowledgments and expressions of
gratitude--you know, stuff like, 'My deep thanks, too, are due to
Logarithmia McCloy for her skillful and patient typing of this book's
manuscript.' And it's dedicated to his hexapod, Waldmeister Schnitzel
V. Luftraumzug, 'My six-legged friend and constant companion.' But
does he mention Joseph McBream, first mate of the _S. S. Tisiphone_,
anywhere in it? Just once? Just one single time? He does not. And yet,
if it hadn't been for me that book would never have been written."

"Did you help him with the recipes?" I asked.

"I did not," Joseph returned decisively. "I'm no greasy groon-slinger.
The recipes in the ENCHIRIDION--agh, what a flossy way to say
handbook--came out of Farquarson's own little head. No, I didn't help
him with the recipes. I only saved his life."

"Tell me about it," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He got on the _Tisiphone_ at Marsport," Joseph McBream said, "with
a sky-blue hexapod, four robot porters to carry his luggage, and a
beautiful blonde secretary who couldn't spell even using phonemes.
About half his stateroom was taken up with cooking stuff. He had
pressure vats and tenderizers and relayed casseroles, more damned
junk than you ever saw outside a museum. He probably had a couple
of alembics and an athanor. It was all of it breakable, and the Old
Man told everyone on board to be careful of it. Farquarson was some
dynast's brother-in-law, and he didn't want to go offending him."

"What was he like personally?" I queried.

"Farquarson? Oh, dignified. God-awful dignified in a loose-jointed
intellectual sort of way. He always wore sports clothes and talked with
a sort of lazy drawl. His manners were beautiful. Everybody on board
hated him.

"The first night out he got into a fracas with the cook about the
proper way of barbolizing bollo ribs. Marno, being half-Venusian, was a
sort of excitable gesell anyhow, and pretty soon we heard noises like
everything in the galley had been thrown on the deck and was being
jumped up and down upon. It practically was, too, and though of course
all that stuff is made of Fraxex, the bollo ribs got badly burned while
the discussion was going on. All we had for dinner that night was clear
soup, vigreen salad, and a sweet.

"The second night out of Marsport Farquarson came to my cabin--Johnny
and I were bunking together then--and said he had a request to make.
He'd been told, he said, that 'spacies' (I wish you could have heard
him trying to use slang; it made you feel like there was a skin
growing over your teeth)--that 'spacies' had a special drink they, ah,
manufactured surreptitiously on certain occasions when they were in
space. Its name he, ah, believed, was jet juice. Did we know anything
about it? Could we furnish any information concerning it to him?"

       *       *       *       *       *

McBream paused. His lips had drawn down in a sour grimace. It was
obvious that he had become absorbed in memories as unpleasant as a dose
of picrin would have been.

"And did you?" I prompted.

"To the everlasting discredit of our common sense, we did. Afterward,
when Johnny and I talked it over, we couldn't understand what had
got into us. It wasn't as though either of us liked him; and we
knew perfectly well how the Old Man felt about jet juice on board
his precious _Tisiphone_. We acted like a couple of girls from the
satellites all overcome by the glamorous lights of the big space port.
Farquarson must have hypnotized us with his fine emporium clothes and
his lazy drawl. An' the worst of it was, it was a wonderful batch of
juice.

"I don't think I ever made a tastier. It had some bilial berries and
kono shoots in it I picked up in Aphrodition, and the usual assortment
of Martian fungi and grains. Just before we'd left Terra I'd had an
inspiration and I'd put in three mangosteens and a big piece of durian.
They were to give it body and depth. Then of course we revved the
mixture up with a bottle or two of soma and some cocla extract, and
put it away to stew in a dark corner of the hold in free flight, away
from the artigravs. It came out a kind of cloudy peach green, smooth as
satin and warm and deep and rich. It was a wonderful batch.

"Johnny got a bottle from under his bunk, where he kept it inside his
depilitating kit, and poured Farquarson a drink. The old yap tasted it
and his eyebrows went up. 'Extraordinary!' said he. 'Ah--could I have
some more?'

"From first to last he finished two and three-quarter bottles of the
drink. When he went to his little bed that night, he was floating up to
his ears. He kept talking about the deadly paididion that was following
him, and wanting Johnny to let him come to grips with it.

"The next day the Old Man came down on us like a ton of osmium. He
called us up to the bridge and said things that--well, I'm not a young
man any more, but they made me feel like I was about fifteen, and
Johnny had tears in his eyes before he was done. Then he sent a couple
of crewmen into the hold and they smashed the carboy and poured out the
juice. One of them told me afterward that there were tears in _his_
eyes, too.

"It seems that that black-hearted ape, Farquarson, had woke up with the
hangover of the eon. Instead of taking his medicine like a little man,
he'd gone loping to the captain for 'remedial agents.' And then, of
course, the fat was frying merrily.

"To do Denis (that was Farquarson's first name, Denis) justice, I don't
think he realized what he was letting us in for. The 'surreptitious' in
the speech he'd made us about jet juice hadn't really registered with
him. He probably thought the captain took a kind of 'spacies will be
spacies' attitude with us.

"But Zinck fined us each two months' pay and ordered us confined to
quarters except for necessary duty until we hit the first of the
Rafts in the Ring. The confinement to quarters was all right, bein'
disciplinary, but the pay docking, being financial, shouldn't have
been imposed without a board meeting, an' we took it up with the
union. There was months and months of rowing, and at the end the board
affirmed Zinck's fine and slapped another month's penalty on us on its
own account."

There was a dispirited silence. "About your saving his life...." I
murmured.

       *       *       *       *       *

McBream brightened. Plainly I had touched on a more pleasant segment of
his recollections. The corners of his mouth, which had been austerely
turned downward, began to right themselves. "Oh, that," he said.

"In order to know what happened, you got to know what the set-up was.
Farquarson had already 'coped with' the cookery of the terra-type
planets, and done what he could with the farther, bigger ones. It's
pretty hard to get chummy with the inhabitants of Jupiter, even if
their food was adapted to human digestions, and I notice Farquarson
has only three Jovian dishes in his book. But anyhow, he was finishing
up with the fringes, the cookery of the satellites, and he'd booked
passage on the _Tisiphone_ because we touched at so many of them.

"Like I said, he was related to some dynast with a lot of tug, and the
Old Man, after checking with an inspector at Marsport, agreed to let
him have the use of the yellow life craft when he wanted it. It was
sort of against regulations, but not too much.

"The craft's bein' yellow was important. Conformably to regulations,
all the _Tisiphone's_ life craft were painted in the psychological
primary colors, to make assigning personnel to them for evacuation
easier, and all of them carried two paint bombs to 'provide adequate
means for prompt renewal of said paint, pigment, enameloid, or tint.'
You want to keep your eye on those paint bombs, because they come into
the picture later on.

"Well, Farquarson got along all right on the first couple or so
satellites. He didn't speak anything except terrestrial languages,
which was rather a handicap, and there never were any interpreters.
He laid the fact that he was sick as a dog three or four times from
things the natives gave him to eat, to difficulties of communication.
Myself, I thought somebody got annoyed with the trick he had of looking
down his nose and bleating 'Oh, rea-l-ly?' every few minutes, and
decided to take direct action.

"Anyhow, he was still in pretty good condition when we got to Iapetus.
Iapetus is under a universal dome. The first day he spent mooching
around the port and buying things in native markets, but the next day
he asked for the life craft and started off by himself. We didn't think
he'd get into any trouble. He wasn't the soul of tact, of course, but
the Talipygians are usually a pretty mild bunch, good-tempered and fond
of a joke."

"Talipygians?" I asked.

"The secondary inhabitants of Iapetus. You can't photograph them
easily, because they're partly electrical energy, and they're
practically impossible to describe. They look like big maroon
hedgehogs, as much as anything, with erectile electric crests over
their heads, and lots of white sharp teeth.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We were having supper on board the _Tisiphone_ when Sparks came in and
spoke to the Old Man. He'd happened to be running over the afternoon
wire on the reproducer, and he'd come across Farquarson's call for
help. The blasted idiot hadn't sent it in code, which would have
automatically set up alarm signals, he'd just yelled 'Help!' into
the 'phone a couple of times, and he hadn't even thought to give his
position when he did it.

"Well, I got sent. In a way, it was a logical choice, because I knew
as much as anybody on board about the Talipygians. Extra-terrestrial
anthropology's always been a sort of hobby of mine. The beauteous
blonde secretary was having hysterics and the hexapod was howling
its head off in sympathy when I left. Just before I zoomed, Zinck
said something in a stern voice about expecting me to return with
Farquarson alive and in good condition, or he'd consider it a breach of
discipline. He knew I didn't like him.

"I had a real devil of a time finding Denis. We get in the habit
of talking as if a planet were about the size of California, and a
satellite no bigger than an amusement park. Take it from me, that's
nothing but pure woola wash. A satellite the size of Iapetus seems
as big as Terra itself when you're hunting a small object on it, and
that life craft was only about five meters long. Iapetus has mountains
and rivers and woods and ravines and all sorts of stuff. I had object
detectors, of course, but Iapetus has lots of ore-bearing rocks,
and anyhow, detectors are of very little use unless you're near the
thing, and I had no idea where it was. I put in nearly fourteen hours
hunting before I found the craft, and even then it was just luck that I
stumbled on it.

"It was down in a gully on the edge of some woods. Everything looked
peaceful and quiet, and Farquarson wasn't anywhere about. I hovered for
a while and thought it over, and then decided to land.

"I had side arms, of course, but I wasn't planning on using them. For
one thing, Farquarson might just have turned his ankle and considered
it a catastrophe which warranted sending a call for help, and for
another, the Talipygians are protected by interplanetary law. They've
been classified as a 'non-humanoid species of limited intelligence,'
and that means that if you bother one of them all hell pops loose.
Quite right, too." Joseph's manner was solemn. "The non-human species
of the system are one of our greatest natural resources.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But as I was saying, I decided to land. I came down easy on
quarter-jet, got out, and started toward the yellow life craft. I heard
a noise in the brush and turned to look. And the next thing I knew,
there I was inside the life craft with my head aching like I'd been
drinking eagle spit.

"I figured out later that one of the Talipygians had knocked me out
with a discharge from his erectile electric crest. They hardly ever
do it, because it's a psychic drain on them, and I'd overlooked the
possibility of it.

"Farquarson was inside the craft, looking dignified and distressed. His
hair was rumpled up and his nethers had completely lost their press.
'I'm glad you've come, McBream,' he said as soon as my eyelids began
flutterin'. 'Perhaps the two of us can contrive some way out of this
predicament.'

"I sat up moaning and holding on to my head. It hurt so much my eyes
felt crossed. I could just make out, on the port side of the life
craft, a cooking pot with a mess of some reddish stuff in it. My side
arms, by the way, were gone. That's one of the things that makes me
wonder if that phrase 'limited intelligence' in the description of the
Talipygians is entirely justified.

"Anyhow, I helped myself up by pulling on the back of the pilot's seat.
Farquarson watched me, his expression intellectual and lugubrious.
'What's been happening?' I asked.

"He shook his head. 'I don't quite know,' he answered. 'I landed the
life craft in this spot, picked a quantity of an unknown deep red
fruit, and was just trying it out in a dish to which I thought it
would be suitable, when I discovered that I was surrounded by a number
of large purple animals. They looked threatening. I managed to call
'Help!' into the receiver, and then I was knocked unconscious. Stunned.

"'When I recovered consciousness, I found that the craft had been
disabled and the means of communication were gone. The animals,
McBream, are still surrounding us.'

       *       *       *       *       *

"I tottered over to a viewing port and looked out. What I saw made my
blood run cold. The Talipygians were bumping around the life craft in
a circle, sliding on their behinds the way they always do, and from
time to time one of them would rear up and sort of shake his crest. It
didn't look so alarming in itself, but as I said, I know a few things
about the Talipygians, and that dance or whatever you'd call it is the
thing a poetically minded anthropologist christened 'The Prelude to the
Sacrifice.' I told you the Talipygians had lots of teeth.

"'I can't imagine why they attacked me,' Farquarson said in a querulous
voice. 'I was only engaging in cookery.'

"I couldn't imagine, either. Usually all the Talipygians want is to
be left alone. Then I had a sudden wild idea. I stumbled over to the
cooking pot and looked in it. Heaven help us! Do you know what that
double-barreled fool of a Farquarson had selected to cook?"

"No," I replied.

"A bunch of Tomato Babies."

McBream obviously expected me to be impressed with this piece of
information. I struggled with it for a time and then gave up. "I never
heard of them," I said.

"Never _heard_ of them? What do they teach you kids on Terra nowadays?
Why, when I was going to school we had course after course in
extra-terrestrial subjects, and you couldn't graduate unless you got
at least a passing grade in Solar History. No wonder people are only
half-educated these days!" McBream sounded outraged.

I had been thinking. "Wait, now," I said, "it seems to me I read a
piece in a digest about the Tomato Babies a couple of years ago. Yes,
I do remember. It was by a professor of Folklore in Ares City College,
and he said that the myth of the Tomato Baby proved that the folklore
theme of the external soul--you know, like the stories in Grimm about
the giants who can't be killed because their souls are in magical eggs
or crystals--that that theme was system-wide."

McBream looked at me. "It isn't a myth," he said with a hint of
indignation, "it's perfectly true. The Folklorist who wrote that
article didn't know what he was talking about. The Tomato Babies are a
big red ovoid fruit that grows on floppy vines in a few odd places on
Iapetus. They're hollow inside, and the Talipygians put their souls in
them."

"_Hunh?_"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, more or less their souls. You remember I told you the
Talipygians were hard to photograph because they were partly electrical
energy. When one of them is sick or wounded, the others take his soul
out--the electrical part of him--and put it inside one of these fruits.
The Tomato Babies, as far as we can find out, are a sort of natural
Leyden jar. Or maybe more like a storage battery. Anyhow, the point is
that a sick Talipygian doesn't have to suffer for months and months
while he's getting well. His electrical component is popped into
one of these containers, and his body can devote itself quietly and
painlessly to the business of recovering."

"And you mean Farquarson cooked--?" I asked, boggling.

"Yes. Of course after the containers had been destroyed, the electrical
charge was lost. It wasn't quite as bad as murder, because the
Talipygians say that when their personal electrical charge is released,
it reshapes itself into a higher form; all the same, Farquarson had
wiped out twenty or thirty relatives and friends of the beings who were
bumping around outside the life craft in their sacrificial dance. When
the electrical charge is dissipated, the bodies wither away. No wonder
the Talipygians were sore.

"I wobbled back to the viewing port and looked at them. I'd always
thought they were quiet, harmless creatures, for all their nearly human
size; now they seemed to be all teeth. I'd never realized before what
particularly vicious lower jaws they had.

"The thing to do was to try to get into communications with them. Now,
I don't speak Talipygian. In my opinion, nobody does, though you'll
meet a few space rats who'll tell you they could write a grammar of it.
But the traders on Iapetus have worked out a system of conventionalized
signs, noises, and so on, for talking to the Talipygians, and it works
well enough most of the time.

"I began trying to attract their attention, making burp noises and
wriggling my hands. For a long time they went on just as if they didn't
notice me. Then one of them, a faint shade bigger than the rest, left
the circle of bumpers and came and stood in front of me. His teeth were
bigger, too. (I say 'his' but it might have been 'her' or 'its'--all I
could really be sure of were the teeth.)

"At first I tried to apologize and explain. The Talipygian listened for
a while and then made the noise that means 'No.' He wasn't interested.
Then I tried threatening. I told him there'd be space cruisers hunting
us, punitive expeditions, all that sort of thing. He didn't say
anything at all this time, but I had the impression he was bubbling
over with laughter inside.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He was perfectly right, of course. Humanoid citizens of the system
are supposed to know their rights and liabilities in dealing with
non-humanoid species. If Farquarson had got into trouble with the
Talipygians, it was strictly his own lookout. Under the circumstances,
if they carved us up, all the government would do would be to send
regretful letters to the names in the 'whom to notify' spaces in
Farquarson's and my dossiers.

"Bribery was the idea I got next. I turned my pockets out for trinkets
and attractive junk. I waved a hunk of fossilized edelweiss and one of
those 'Halmjin' crystal games that were so popular last year in his
face. No soap.

"The Talipygian flapped his flippers, erected his crest, and said
'gunk' a couple of times. That meant, why bother? He'd get all of our
belongings anyhow after we were dead.

"Finally I asked him what they were planning to do with us. Eat us, the
answer came back like a flash. Of course I'd known it before, but it
still was a little disconcertin'. I'm not quite sure, but I think he
said he was sorry I'd get eaten along with Farquarson. He couldn't help
it, though.

"I went back inside the life craft and sat down to think. I was dead
tired from all the work I'd put in hunting for Farquarson earlier,
and my head still ached. And Farquarson kept dancing around me asking
idiotic questions and wringing his hands.

"I pulled out of my mind all I'd ever heard about the Talipygian
character, and went over it. It wasn't much. They were said to have
mild, peaceable natures, lay eggs, engage in ritual dances now an' then
as a prelude to slaughtering the local animals, and be fond of a good
laugh. The mild and peaceful nature wasn't much in evidence just at
present; the eggs weren't relevant; _we_ were going to take the place
of the local animals in the sacrifice, and how did the sense of humor
help? I couldn't tell them funny stories in sign language, could I?

"As far as that went, I'd only seen a Talipygian amused once. That was
when we were in port on Iapetus on the trip before. A fat Venusian
had been comin' down the steps of the Tashkent Import and Export
Exchange. He'd slipped on the top step and gone all the way down to the
bottom, touching only the third and eighteenth steps on the way. It
had been quite spectacular. Of course he'd had to go to the hospital
afterward and have five stitches taken, but the Talipygian couldn't
have known that at the time. Maybe it wouldn't have made any difference
if he _had_ known--I had a feeling that his people liked their humor
practical and rough.

"Farquarson came up to where I was sitting with my head in my hands,
and nudged me. 'They're moving faster,' he said in a nervous tone.
'Those things on the tops of their heads are flashing more and more
frequently. Do you suppose it means anything?'

       *       *       *       *       *

"I went over to the port fast, and looked. Just as I'd feared, it meant
all too much. Judging from the sign, the Talipygians were getting ready
to make ritual hash of us.

"I tell you, I was desperate. Of course we could, and would, make a
rush for it, but there were forty or fifty of them to two of us; we
were unarmed, and each and every Talipygian could deliver a stunning
electric shock. I could feel my mind giving off loud clicks like a
Geiger counter near a rich source. What to do, what to do? Then my eyes
lit on the rack holding the bomb with the yellow paint.

"Inside two minutes I had all the clothes off Farquarson except his
sliskin shorts. At first he was too surprised to complain, even though
he turned out to have a considerable paunch. But when I took the paint
bomb and began paintin' big bright daisies on his shoulders, back, and
tummy-tum, he started to heat up; and when he found out what my idea
was, he really did get talky and obstreperous. 'I won't do it,' he said
vigorously, 'I absolutely refuse. Not before these animals. Have you no
conception, McBream, of dignity? I'd rather--' he glanced out of the
port toward the toothy Talipygians and winced a little--'I'd rather be
dead.'

"I tried to be reasonable with him. 'Listen, Denis,' I told him, 'it's
absolutely immaterial to me whether they eat you or not. In fact, I'm
all in favor of their cutting you up in little pieces for a mess of
shis-kebab. It would be the finest thing to happen to the System since
the discovery of Alpha-Omega power. Yet juicer!' (My feelin's overcame
me a little when I thought of all the trouble Farquarson had got me
in.) 'But if they eat you, they eat me too, for a side dish, and we
can't have that. On your way! Get!' I had to give him a push or two,
but he got."

"A push?" I queried. Joseph's narrative was becoming interesting.

"With my foot. It was all to the good, I think--it limbered him up.
Well, we went outside the life craft, hesitated a second or so, and
went into our dance.

"I was prepared to do my part. I'd painted big yellow flowers all over
myself too, and I didn't mind how big a fool I looked, provided it
saved my life. But it was plain right from the start that Farquarson,
reluctant as he was, was the star of the show. The Talipygians hardly
noticed me. They stopped bumping almost immediately and clustered
around Denis with their crests popping off and on like space port
signal lights.

"That guy really had talent. The idea of him writing a cook book with
a fancy title when he could perform like that! After he got started
he jumped up and down like one inspired, and once when he fell down,
probably accidentally, you could have heard the noise the Talipygians
made applaudin' with their flippers on the other side of Iapetus.
Funny! Why, he'd have made a fortune on the stereo. All he needed was a
little well-timed encouragement."

"Encouragement?" I questioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joseph cast down his eyes. "Well, you know," he said vaguely,
"things.... After a while the Talipygians themselves got the idea, an'
whenever Farquarson showed signs of slowin' down they shot long, slow,
low-voltage sparks out of their electric crests at him. One missed him
once and hit me instead; it was just like being stuck with a long,
sharp pin.

"Pretty soon Farquarson got so warm the daisies on his tummy began
runnin'. The Talipygian chief gooped and guggled and geeked at me until
I got the idea and fetched the bomb and painted them on real bright
again. I had to renew his daisies three times before we got out of
there."

McBream's expression was smug and self-satisfied. He looked like a
weetareete which, having finished a jug of bovula cream on one side of
a theo table, knows that there is another jug, equally full and equally
accessible, on the other side.

"But what finally happened?" I asked.

"Well, the blue and green life craft from the _Tisiphone_ came
after us. Zinck was on the blue one himself--he thought it was that
important. Farquarson was doin' splits and then jumpin' high up in the
air, almost to the dome, when they got there. The daisies on his tummy
were good and bright.

"Zinck got out of the blue craft, trying hard to keep from smiling,
and presented his compliments to the head Talipygian. They glooped
and gunked for a minute or two, an' then any remainin' signs of a
smile disappeared from Zinck's face. For the trouble was this. The
Talipygians didn't want to let Farquarson go.

"The conversation went something like this: Zinck: 'Gloop. Wheepie.
Geet.' Intricate wiggle of hands.

"Talipygian: 'Nee. Neeeeee.'

"Farquarson: 'What is happening, McBream?'

"Me: 'Be quiet.'

"Zinck: 'Gleeed! Damn it, Gleeed!' (turning to us) 'They say they're
going to hold him as recompense for all their relatives he murdered.'

"Farquarson: 'It was purely an accident!'

"Zinck: (sourly) 'You should have been more careful, Mr. Farquarson,
really you should--'Gleep. Wheepies. Blee.'

"The upshot of the matter was that Zinck negotiated a contract with the
Talipygians. They agreed to release Denis on condition--" here McBream
seemed to be smacking his lips--"on condition that he return on the
same date each year and perform for them. His costume, it was expressly
stipulated, was to be the same, includin' the daisies.

"Farquarson didn't cut up as rough about the terms of the contract as
I'd expected him to. I think he had the idea that a contract between
a human an' a non-humanoid species wouldn't be legally binding. But
when we got back on the _Tisiphone_, Zinck explained to him that such
contracts are always made between the human on the one hand and the
Interplanetary Government, acting for the non-humanoid species, on the
other. Bindin'! It was more bindin' than a barrel full of nuclear-bond
glue."

"And does he--?" I murmured after a silence.

"Yes, every year. He'll be leaving for Iapetus day after tomorrow for
his annual pilgrimage. He always gets a lot of bon voyage gifts. Funny,
isn't it? He begged Zinck and me--especially me--to keep the terms of
the contract quiet, and Zinck said he would. But like I said Farquarson
always gets a lot of bon voyage gifts and--isn't it odd?--they're
always flowers. Baskets and baskets and baskets of daisy flowers."

The corners of McBream's mouth, which had been somewhat elevated, began
to turn down again. "But isn't it ungrateful?" he said indignantly.
"After I saved his life and all that! Wouldn't you think mere
elementary decency would have made him mention me in his book?"

"H'um," I said.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RETURN ENGAGEMENT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Trouble On Sun-Side, by S. M. Tenneshaw

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Trouble On Sun-Side

Author: S. M. Tenneshaw

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65768]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TROUBLE ON SUN-SIDE ***




                          Trouble On Sun-Side

                          By S. M. Tenneshaw

                Jansen came to Mercury to find one man,
            and that seemed an easy enough task; the hitch
            was that as a hunter he was also being hunted!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                             October 1956
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Jansen began to sweat as soon as he left the spaceship. The bloated,
swollen sun hovering near the horizon here in twilight zone was
dazzling even through his protective goggles. Jansen knew he would have
to get used to it: Mercury's twilight zone, like it or not, would be
his home for the indefinite future.

Stowing his gear in the barracks while sweat streamed from his body,
Jansen realized for the first time that his luggage had been examined
aboard the spaceship. That was bad; it could mean anything; it
certainly meant trouble.

_I have to hurry_, Jansen thought. _In a day or so, they're liable to
haul me in for questioning._

"Still time for me to go out and join the work force?" Jansen asked the
barracks orderly as the old man came shuffling by.

"Eager, ain't you, mister. They'll get along without you till
tomorrow, you can bet."

"Well, can I go take a look, then?"

The old man studied him with surprise. Apparently gold-bricking and not
eager-beavering was the order of the day here. "What's your rating?"
the orderly asked.

"Twelve."

"Well, nobody would push you around, I guess," admitted the barracks
orderly with grudging respect. "Why don't you see the town, though?
Town's all right. Don't go out to the bogs unless you have to."

_Bogs_, thought Jansen. _Bogs on Mercury's sun-side._ He still couldn't
get over it.

Jansen changed into a skin-tight white insulsuit and went outside. The
insulsuit covered him almost like an additional layer of skin: he wore
trousers and a shirt over it. Without the insulsuit, exposure this
close to Mercury's sun-side would be impossible for more than a few
moments.

It took Jansen twenty minutes to realize he was being followed. His
tail wore an insulsuit and a pair of colorful shorts. This seemed to be
the universal garb in Sun-side City, so that the hundreds of loungers
and shoppers all looked alike, with the skull-cap cowls of their
insulsuits even hiding the distinctiveness of their hair. Jansen's tail
was a man bigger than most, though, and it was only because he was
wandering aimlessly in the sun-dazzled streets that Jansen became aware
of pursuit at all.

He ducked into an alley between two cafes. Two women in skin-tight
insulsuits came by, then a man and a boy, then the big man who had been
following Jansen. Abruptly Jansen stepped from the alley.

"Just a minute," he said.

The man whirled, a blank expression on his face.

"What do you want?" Jansen asked.

"I don't get you, mister. You stopped me, I didn't stop you. What do
_you_ want?"

"You were following me," Jansen said.

"I never saw you before in my life."

Before Jansen could answer, the sun went down. It did not set, as the
sun sets on Earth. It disappeared, due to the sudden unpredictable
wobbles of Mercury's twilight zone. It was an astronomical phenomena.
And, despite the sun's great apparent size, Jansen suddenly found
himself in pitch darkness. It alarmed him at first, until he realized
that Mercury had no atmosphere, except for the artificial pockets under
the man-made domes. There was no layer of air to retain the sun's glow.
One moment, dazzling light; the next, almost total darkness.

"Where are you?" Jansen called. He groped his way toward where the man
had been standing. He heard a girl's laughter on the street nearby,
heard an old woman's shout.

Something struck the side of his head, summoning blinding pain. Jansen
staggered and fell to the sidewalk on hands and knees. He felt himself
being frisked expertly in his half-conscious state. Something was
removed from his trouser-pocket: his wallet probably. He tried to get
up but fell forward, scraping his jaw. He heard retreating footsteps.

_Number one botch-job_, he thought, and lost consciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he came to, he was not alone. He was no longer on the sidewalk,
either. He had been taken into a house.

He found himself looking at a girl in insulsuit and shorts. The
forehead-piece of the girl's skin-tight cowl came down in a sharp
widow's peak, in the current feminine fashion. It made her entire face,
with its high cheek bones and long narrow eyes and small, stubborn,
pointed chin, look somewhat aquatic. She was a very pretty girl and her
figure under the revealing insulsuit was breath-taking.

"You're all right, Mr. Jansen?" she asked.

Jansen. She'd called him by his name. He was on his guard at once. He'd
gotten work at the Sun-station employment office on Earth as Wilson.
His name was unknown here on Mercury--except to the person who'd gone
through his bags aboard ship and the big man who'd taken his wallet on
the street.

He nodded his head slowly. His head ached and he felt weak and washed
out, but he could feel the strength flowing back into him.

The woman smiled. Then the smile left her face so quickly, it startled
Jansen. "We don't want you here," she said. "We don't want you on
Mercury, Jansen."

He stood up. "Thanks for dragging me in off the street. I'll get out of
here now."

"Leave Mercury, Mr. Jansen. While you still can."

He headed for the door, his temple throbbing with pain. She helped him
across the room coolly, efficiently, supporting his shoulder but barely
seeming to touch him. He wished his head was clearer. He wanted to
question this girl. She knew him; she'd had him tailed.

"Get out while you can," she was saying. "Remember what happened to
your brother."

He whirled on the threshold and pushed her back into the room ahead of
him. "Go ahead," he said coldly. "Tell me about my brother."

Her face told him she knew she'd blundered. "Just get out of here, you
fool!" she cried.

"Tell me about my brother."

"He's dead. What does it matter except he's dead?"

"How did he die, Miss Hilliard?"

She gave him a startled look. "You know me?"

"A guess. You're Wendy Hilliard, aren't you?"

"Y-yes."

"He used to write me about you," Jansen said bitterly. "Girl Friday
or something. But when he started to go down you took off like the
well-known rats. Didn't you, Wendy?"

Her hand struck his cheek stingingly. "Now clear out," she said, her
voice catching on a sob.

He laughed harshly. "Well, what did you expect? It's why you had my
things searched on the ship, isn't it? It's why you had that big guy
follow me."

Wendy Hilliard's face was white. "I didn't have your things searched on
the ship," she said.

He looked at her searchingly: she meant that, he knew.

"Oh, don't you see?" she said, clutching his arm. "Don't you see? It
was Bareen, Mr. Jansen. I know you're here and Bareen knows it. It was
Bareen who had your brother killed and--"

"Why?" Jansen asked.

"Because he knew too much. Because Bareen is going to become the
richest man in the solar system and--and Ted got an inkling of what was
happening."

"You seem to know," Jansen said dryly. "But you're still here. So what
happened to Ted?"

"Look, Mr. Jansen. Let me give you about a five minute course in
Mercurian economics. Here at Sun-side station, we produce food for
Earth's teeming billions. Since directly or indirectly, all food is
stored solar energy and since we're much closer to the sun here,
food-energy is produced abundantly and not expensively."

"I know all that," Jansen said irritably.

"Let me finish. You'll see why. What we grow in the sun-side bogs is
chlorella, millions of tons of chlorella, which is converted into
synth-steak and other pseudo-meats on Earth. Now, there are two keys to
the production. The first, of course, is water. Chlorella must grow in
bogs, which means artificial irrigation. The second is the sub-space
tunnel. You know about that, Jansen. Call it a hole in space which
shortcuts the distance between Mercury and Earth. The chlorella is
shipped Earthward through this sub-space tunnel, not only instantly,
but cheaply.

"Bareen works the tunnel, Mr. Jansen. Bareen's men control the
irrigation station. Bareen is now in a position to demand any price
he wishes from Earth for the chlorella. If Earth doesn't agree, Earth
starves. That's why your brother was killed. He learned about this
before Bareen was ready to strike. He's almost ready now, Mr. Jansen."

"Where do you fit in? If Ted was killed--"

Wendy's face colored. "I wanted to go on living, Mr. Jansen. I didn't
want to die. I can't be an idealist if my own life--"

"What did you do?" His hand gripped her wrist. "Did you turn Ted over
to Bareen?"

She struck his face a second time. "I loved your brother. I wouldn't
have done a thing like that."

"Then what?"

"I told you what you wanted to know. I don't have to tell you more. Now
get out of here." She followed him to the door. "But you have to leave
Mercury at once, you see," she said. "Bareen can't afford to let you
live. Bareen will have you killed."

"The way they tell it on Earth, Bareen's a loner. If he goes, the whole
outfit folds and will play ball with Earth the way it ought to. Is that
the way you see it?"

"Yes, but--"

"You thought I was here for revenge? I am, baby. Don't get any wrong
ideas. But I've also got a job to do. Earth needs that chlorella." He
opened the door.

"Jansen--"

"Well?"

"Nothing. Just be careful."

He laughed harshly and walked out into the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The man's name was Dinnison. He had the bunk next to Jansen's in the
barracks and he, like Jansen, was a newcomer. He'd shipped to Mercury
from the Venusian dust-desert in search of greener pastures. Jansen
felt sorry for him, then ruthlessly beat down the feeling. He had no
time for pity.

While it was still dark he followed Dinnison outside the barracks and
thrust a mugging arm around his neck. Dinnison struggled, his arms
flailing, his legs drumming. Once he almost broke loose, but Jansen
held him until he had lost consciousness. _A day_, Jansen thought.
_Bareen knows I'm here, so all I can expect is a day now._

He dragged Dinnison into a storage shed. The slight effort left him
drenched with sweat, despite the insulsuit. He found rope and bound
Dinnison, then took tape from his pocket and gagged him.

Ten minutes later he returned to the barracks with Dinnison's
identification papers. _Andrew Dinnison_, he thought. _I'm Dinnison
now._ Bareen's men would be looking for Frank Jansen, he knew. But
unless Wendy Hilliard told them, they wouldn't know what Jansen looked
like.

_I'm Dinnison...._

He slept poorly. He dreamed but in the morning did not remember his
dreams. When he awoke, Mercury had wobbled sufficiently for the
twilight zone to be in sunlight again.

"Rise and shine, men!" a supervisor's voice blared over the
loudspeaker. "Got some gunk to harvest!"

Jansen watched the men get up, groaning and complaining, in the
barracks. Gunk was the supervisor's word for chlorella, Jansen thought.
Looking at the men he decided they had other words for it, none of them
printable. For, although the pay was good, it was sheer hell working on
Mercury and the average employee at the chlorella bogs didn't stay more
than three months.

With the others Jansen went outside and piled onto one of the half
dozen swamp-buggies which came for them. The buggies were surplus Army
amphibian vehicles and rattled noisily over dry ground. They formed
a line, single file, and headed through the domed corridor that
connected Sun-side city, which was actually in the twilight zone, with
the bogs themselves, which were on the sun-side of Mercury.

If it had been hot in the city, despite man's best air-conditioning
efforts, it was murderously hot in the bogs. The sun burned down on
the dome and through it; the irrigation water evaporated rapidly, so
rapidly that the dehumidifiers could not carry it away quickly enough.
As a result, the bogs were not only terribly hot, but humid as the
inside of a Turkish bath. Jansen felt washed out before he'd even begun
his work.

The swamp-buggies took them to a field of chlorella, the valuable plant
growing like a thick coating of slime on the bogs. The men, moving
slowly to conserve energy in the heat, climbed down from the buggies
and attacked the chlorella by sweeping the surface of the bogs with
their muscle-powered harvesters.

Jansen smiled in spite of himself. Agricultural methods five thousand
and more years old! It couldn't be helped on Mercury, of course.
Most available machinery was needed on Earth, for Earth's billions.
The metal for machinery was at a premium; the great iron mines of
two centuries before were almost exhausted and no new supply had
been found on any of the planets--at least none which could be mined
productively at slight enough cost. Result: the outworlds got along
with primitive methods or didn't get along at all.

Dinnison, Jansen discovered, had a rating of Six. It was not as bad as
it could have been, but a good deal worse than Jansen's own twelve. At
least Dinnison wasn't a harvester. Instead, Dinnison had been assigned
to the packing platforms, and that was where Jansen found himself
working. Here the chlorella was dried in the fierce sun and baled. The
baling, of course, was done by hand and the chlorella, dry enough for
baling but still sodden, was heavy. Afterwards, Jansen knew, it would
be taken to the sub-space tunnel and shipped to Earth without even the
necessity of dehydration.

All morning Jansen worked in hot, stifling silence. Whenever a
supervisor came in his direction he half-expected a heavy hand to fall
on his shoulder and an accusing voice to call out his real name.

At lunch hour he wandered off, all but exhausted, into the scant shade
of one of the compound shacks. He sat there, popping energy tablets
into his mouth. He was too weak to eat food although he saw it being
served from big trays perhaps fifty yards away.

"Jansen," a voice called softly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked up quickly, his eyes taking seconds to focus in the almost
blinding glare. It was Wendy Hilliard, looking amazingly cool in her
insulsuit and shorts.

He reached up and grabbed her arm, pulling her down alongside him. "How
did you find me?" he demanded.

"It was an accident, although--" her voice trailed off.

"Although what?"

"You're hurting me!"

"Although what, Miss Hilliard?"

"I--well, I was looking for you, Jansen. I want to help you."

"Sure," he said, a trace of bitterness in his voice.

She smiled. "I'd say you need some help. You look all washed out."

"Your sympathy is touching. Did you say the same thing to Ted, before
he was killed?"

"You fool. I liked your brother."

"He used a different word."

"All right. I loved him. He's dead now. We can't bring him back to
life."

"So what do you want?"

"Bareen's here. In the bogs today."

Instantly, Jansen was alert. He could feel fresh strength surge
through his muscles, his blood. Bareen! At last, he thought, Bareen!
For Ted....

And for Earth.

Ted had been an Earth agent on Mercury. Jansen was not: Jansen had been
prospecting in the asteroids when he heard of Ted's death. But he'd
gone to Ted's agency at once and offered his services. Now he was here,
where Ted had been. Now he was in Ted's place. What would Ted have
done? He didn't know. But he had his orders. They were explicit--and
ruthless.

"You will report to Sun-side City," they had told him. "You will seek
Bareen out. Without Bareen, the organization he has built up will
crumble. With Bareen, it will gain control, complete control instead
of managerial control, of the irrigation system and the sub-space
tunnel. Bareen will become a fabulously wealthy and powerful man, at
the expense of Earth's starving billions. You will find Bareen and kill
him."

Assassination, Jansen thought now. Legally, it would be a crime.
The civilized worlds would forever be closed to Jansen. But morally
it would be anything but a crime. Morally, Jansen would be helping
billions of people he would never see--and, if he helped them, he would
be from that day forth an outcast who must live out the rest of his
life on the far outworlds.

For Ted, he thought. And Earth....

"Why'd Bareen come here?" Jansen asked the girl suspiciously. "I
thought he runs this show from the sub-space tunnel."

"Sure he does. But periodically he comes here to check on his men. You
must have known it: why did you come here?"

"I couldn't get assigned to the sub-space tunnel. I'm no technician. I
was going to figure a way in, later."

"There's no later for you. How much time do you think you have, Jansen?"

He shrugged, and asked a question of his own. "Why are you pretending
to help me?"

"Ted and I--"

"He's dead now, remember?"

Wendy stood up angrily. "All right, have it your way. Bareen is here.
You're here. I thought that was what you wanted. I told you. I--"

Just then the one streamlined swamp-buggy Jansen had seen came chugging
up through the brackish water. A hatch opened and as it did so Wendy
moved quickly away from Jansen. She waded toward the buggy, smiling. A
man appeared in the hatch, a big man, big as Jansen and wider. He was
younger than Jansen thought he would be. He was handsome and somehow
cold-looking.

"Wendy, my dear," Jansen heard him say. "This is a pleasant surprise."

Wendy reached the swamp-buggy. Bareen--for it was Bareen--leaned over
and offered her a hand. He drew her up to him and she turned her cheek
for his kiss. Then they disappeared inside the buggy and it chugged
away.

Jansen sat there for a moment. Bareen, he thought. Bareen and Wendy
Hilliard. Well, why not? Hadn't Ted been killed?

_But why did she come to me?_

Jansen stood up. His limbs trembled with heat-fatigue and he popped two
salt tablets into his mouth. He began to walk.

"Hey, you!" a supervisor called. "Lunch hour's almost over. Where you
going?"

Jansen didn't answer. The swamp-buggy, moving slowly through the brown
water, was almost out of sight. A dome corridor led from the chlorella
bogs to the irrigation station, Jansen knew. The buggy was headed in
that direction.

"I said, where you going?"

Jansen didn't answer the shouted question. There wasn't time. He ran,
splashing through the thigh-deep water, moving clumsily and slowly.
Instead of following Bareen's buggy, he headed for where the other
vehicles were parked. He climbed on one and began to unbolt the hatch
when he heard boots on metal behind him.

It was the supervisor. "For the last time, buddy--"

Jansen turned and hit him. The supervisor, an astonished look on his
face, stumbled back off the amphibious vehicle and into the swamp.
Jansen waited to see that he got up, then slid in through the hatch and
started the buggy.

There would be an alarm, he knew. But Bareen's buggy hadn't been
hurrying. If he could overtake it....

       *       *       *       *       *

He chugged along, expecting pursuit momentarily. He rode with the hatch
open and his body half out, for best visibility. He saw the other swamp
vehicle, perhaps three hundred yards ahead. It reached the narrow neck
of the domed corridor and paused at the check-point there, then went
through.

Soon Jansen reached the check-point. Two men with blasting rifles stood
in his path, looking suspicious.

"Get out of the way!" Jansen called boldly. "I'm Bareen's bodyguard."

"Behind him?"

"Where would you stay, friend?"

The guards exchanged glances. One of them grinned. But the other one
said, "We got a report of a guy who--"

"I wouldn't be interested in any reports," Jansen said curtly. "Now, do
you let me through or do I report you to Bareen?"

Glances were exchanged again. One of the guards shrugged. They didn't
want trouble. Jansen's very boldness was his best weapon. Finally,
exchanging glances once more, they waved him on.

The second swamp-buggy was by then out of sight down the domed
corridor. But half an hour later Jansen reached the big, white,
squat structure which housed the irrigation machinery. And Bareen's
streamlined swamp-buggy was parked outside on the dry ground.

He went inside and an armed man stood in his path. "Well?"

"Bareen," Jansen said.

"Come and gone, with Miss Hilliard."

"But his buggy--"

"Who're you?"

"Bodyguard," Jansen said promptly. It had worked once.

"Hell, then you ought to know. Why ask me?"

"You know Mr. Bareen," Jansen said, smiling. "Impulsive."

"Is he? I guess I wouldn't know."

"Look. Ordinarily I wouldn't mind passing the time of day with you,
but I'm not supposed to let Bareen out of my sight. So if you'll just
tell me where he is...."

"Show me."

"What did you say?" Jansen asked with a sickening realization of what
the guard wanted.

"You say you're his bodyguard. Show me."

Jansen swung his fist in a quick, blurring arc and hit the man. He felt
the pain of good contact and the man went over on his back, striking
the ground hard. Jansen knelt quickly by his side: he was breathing
normally. Quickly Jansen searched him and found a small hand-blaster.
He pocketed it and got up, dragging the unconscious man into an alcove
which housed an inter-office communications system. On impulse, Jansen
picked up the microphone and said:

"Mr. Bareen, please. This is important."

"I'm sorry, sir. Mr. Bareen has taken the sub-spacer back to the
interplanetary sub-space tunnel."

"Thank you," Jansen said automatically. There was a small sub-space
tunnel connecting the irrigation station with the big interplanetary
space-warp, Jansen knew. Even now Bareen and Wendy Hilliard, having
inspected the plant, were a hundred thousand miles away, in deep space,
at the tunnel station.

While Jansen was thinking, the communications system board flashed and
a voice said:

"Emergency! Emergency! Someone has stolen a buggy and is believed
heading for the irrigation station. He may be armed and is probably
dangerous."

Jansen acknowledged the information, then said: "The buggy just passed
this way, but it kept going."

"You're sure?"

"Positive."

"Thanks. We'll relay the information."

That ruse would give him a few minutes, Jansen knew. But for what
purpose?

Bareen and Wendy Hilliard! If they used the sub-space tunnel, why
couldn't he?

He left the alcove and charged down a brightly-lit hallway, passing a
cavern-sized room a-throb with banks of machinery. A technician looked
up at him and Jansen said:

"The sub-spacer. Hurry, man. This is urgent."

The technician pointed, spoke. Jansen followed his directions on the
dead run.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he reached it, he saw what looked like a vidiphone booth in a
large, otherwise empty room. But vidiphone booths don't usually have
armed guards....

"This is for Mr. Bareen's private use," the guard said, brandishing a
blasting rifle. "Better beat it."

No ruses here. This guard would know. This was one of Bareen's private
thugs, probably. Jansen took a breath and dove at him.

The blaster roared, searing air over Jansen's head. He hit the guard's
middle and they went down together, the rifle falling from the guard's
grasp. They rolled over and over, then the guard got to his knees and
clubbed an elbow at Jansen's jaw. Jansen rolled on his back, his face
suddenly numb. The guard dove for him, pinned him and called for help.

Jansen struggled frantically. He heard footsteps pounding toward them,
then brought his legs up and scissored the guard's throat, pulling him
down and away. Jansen released the scissors abruptly and scrambled to
his feet. He made it to the sub-space booth and pulled the door open.
There was a single lever inside and he yanked at it as he slammed the
transparent door. He felt nothing at first. He saw the guard retrieve
his rifle, pointing it at the booth and firing.

But the blast of raw energy never reached Jansen. For he was already
being transported through sub-space....

He had no time to marshall his thoughts. The first thing he saw through
the transparent door of the twin booth a hundred thousand miles away on
the sub-space station, was Bareen. Bareen was standing just outside the
booth, holding a blaster.

He was pointing the blaster at Wendy Hilliard, whose face was white.
Jansen opened the door and Bareen's deep voice ended with: "... to kill
you now."

Jansen turned quickly and fired his blaster not at Bareen but at the
controls of the sub-space booth. This way, he hoped, they wouldn't be
interrupted. This way--

"Jansen!" Wendy screamed.

Bareen whirled, facing Jansen. His eyes widened and as he fired the
blaster Jansen felt a numbing pain in his right leg. The blaster had
merely seared him, he knew. But if Bareen had time for another try....

Jansen leaped at him and they went crashing across the room toward
another, and larger, sub-space booth. Jansen was exhausted. The quick
pursuit, the fight at the irrigation center, the unfamiliar activity at
the chlorella bogs, had drained most of the energy from his body. And
Bareen was strong.

He slowly forced Jansen back, choking him. Jansen's hands waved weakly
in front of his face, fluttering uselessly. Bareen was going to kill
him, as he had killed his brother....

Jansen's vision swam. Balls of flame seared before his eyes. He was
dimly aware of Wendy clawing at Bareen's back, but the big man pushed
her away, then hurled her across the room with one out-flung arm.

Jansen butted with his head. He brought his knee up. He swung his fists
and felt contact with Bareen's face. But Bareen held onto his throat
with one large hand, getting the other one free to use the blaster.
He brought it up slowly, and Jansen forgot about the hand about his
throat. He reached for the blaster, struggling for possession of it
with Bareen. He butted again and saw a bloody smear where Bareen's
mouth had been. The blaster was between them....

And roared....

Bareen slumped against him and the pressure was suddenly gone from his
throat. When he looked down at Bareen he saw that the man's entire face
had been shot away--

"I was working for your brother," Wendy sobbed. "I never gave up. I
was gathering evidence about what Bareen planned. You--you came just
in time. He was going to give his ultimatum to Earth today. Triple the
price, or no chlorella. They'd have had to say yes."

Feet pounded in a corridor, came closer.

"We won," Jansen said. "But now--we're finished."

"Quick!" Wendy cried, pulling him toward the larger sub-space booth.
"It connects with Earth."

"I can't return to Earth. I've just killed a man. I--"

"Self-defense. I saw you. Besides, we have the proof that Bareen was
going to bleed Earth dry for chlorella."

"... the outworlds...." he said.

"You don't have to hide on the outworlds now."

"Hide, nothing," Jansen said, smiling weakly but happily the
split-second before they were whisked seventy million miles through
sub-space. "If you're not a fugitive, the outworlds are wonderful.
Maybe you'd like...."

He was going to say, _like to join me_. It was an impulse he couldn't
explain, as if the depths of sub-space drew a man's secret desires from
his unconscious mind.

And as they began to materialize on Earth he heard Wendy's voice, as if
from far away:

"Maybe I'd like to try that."

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TROUBLE ON SUN-SIDE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ride the Crepe Ring, by Milton Lesser

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Ride the Crepe Ring

Author: Milton Lesser

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65767]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIDE THE CREPE RING ***




                          RIDE THE CREPE RING

                           By Milton Lesser

               Norma thought it would be a great thrill
           to dodge the meteors in Saturn's forbidden Ring.
           A thrill yes--but would she live to enjoy it?...

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                              March 1952
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Mimas was a cold little world where the sun's rays seldom reached. You
stayed under a big glassite dome on the four-hundred mile sphere if you
stayed there at all, and you hardly saw the sun anyway because Saturn
and its rings were so big and so bright.

The temperature under the dome was kept in the forties because Mimas
was a summer resort, provided you wanted to travel three quarters of a
billion miles to leave the heat and the bustle of the inferior planets
behind you.

It was cold, but Mr. S. Smith sweated. The S. was for Socrates, but
everyone called him Smitty. Now he looked at his visitor and the sweat
formed little glistening beads on his forehead. The man was short and
stout with a bald head and a florid face. He looked silly next to
Socrates Smith because Socrates stood six and a half feet tall without
his space-boots, and he could have been a Martian bone bird for all the
flesh on his body.

"That's the size of it, Smith," the florid little man said. "We don't
care if you _are_ a billion miles from the sun--"

"Eight-hundred eighty-five million nine-hundred and sixty-three
thousand seventy-two," Socrates said proudly. "The most distant
pleasure-spot in the Solar System. Want to get away from it all? Come
to Mimas, with Saturn's rings right in your backyard...."

"That's it. We've had enough monkey business. Government was sued
because it sanctioned your artificial satellite above Jupiter's Red
Spot. The Red Spot Palace--bah! More people complained of asthma--"

"I included spacesuits with each domette, Mr. Farquhart. How did I know
somebody sold me an inferior product?"

Farquhart shook his head. "None of my business. All your customers went
to Mars to get rid of their asthma. Mars boomed, then over-produced.
We had deflation, and the whole tourist business went to pot for three
years. Why don't you try something simple like a spa on one of the
Venusian islands? I got a cousin--"

"Too crowded, too much competition. No, Mr. Farquhart, I have something
different here. It'll make me a million. Then I can retire, buy me an
estate on Ganymede and be out of your hair."

"It's not as simple as that, Smith. First I got to check this place.
Is it safe? How do I know it's safe? Will you give phony asthma to ten
thousand people again?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Socrates still sweated, but he was all business now. "Of course it's
safe. All my ships are war-surplus two-man cruisers, all twenty of
them. You trust the Space Navy, don't you?"

"Naturally, naturally." Farquhart lit a cigar. "But what do you do with
those ships?"

"We ride the rings, that's what we do. Only A and B, of course. The
Saturnian Merrygoround, that's what we have here. Someone's a licensed
pilot, I let him take a ship up himself. Otherwise I provide pilots."

"But is it safe?"

"You bet it's safe! And fun--it's terrific. The whole ring system is
a hundred and seventy-one thousand miles across, a big merrygoround.
Ten thousand miles of outer ring, sixteen thousand miles of bright
ring--all to play in. Billions of meteors, and all the tourists have to
do is dodge 'em. Great fun."

"I don't want to be a stick in the mud, Mr. Smith, but, ah, what
happens if someone doesn't dodge?"

"Not a chance. How could anyone miss? The ring-particles shine by
reflected sunlight--you can see each one clear as hell, and you just
avoid 'em, that's all. We don't go near the third ring, the crepe
ring--not that dark baby. That could be dangerous. You know, the
innermost ring, only seven thousand miles from Saturn itself. That's
dark as the inside of a Plutonian catacomb. I thought of a resort there
at first, but it's too damned far--"

Farquhart stood up. "Well, I don't want to take any more of your time.
Tell you what I'll do, Smith. I'll stick around three, four days, and
watch some of your tourists. I'll be fair about the whole thing--if
it's safe, excellent: if not--" He shrugged. "You got quarters for me,
Smith?"

Socrates started to tell him of the wonderful accommodations, thought
better of it, checked on a domette vacancy, and gave Farquhart his key.
"I'll see you," the short fat man said.

Socrates mopped his brow.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can I come out now?"

Wearily, Socrates sat down. "Yes, come on. He's gone."

She was as tall for a girl as Socrates was for a man, and the long
cascade of her golden hair didn't need sunlight to make it gleam. She
was the prettiest thing in Mimas, and that included Socrates' glossy
new domettes. But it was because of her that he perspired.

"Please go away," he said. "Grow up in someone else's tourist haven,
Norma, like a good girl. If you hadn't decided to see what was in the
sponge grottoes of Callisto I'd still have my business there. If you
hadn't--"

"Bygones are bygones, Smitty. That's a good boy. But not quite. I see
your good friend Percival Farquhart is back--"

"Is that what the P. stands for? Percival, hah-hah."

"I wouldn't talk, _Socrates_. I wouldn't talk at all."

"Okay, okay. But look--there's a liner for Ceres tonight. I'll buy you
a ticket. The Interplanetary Fair--"

"I already saw it. Stinks. Besides, I have a roundtrip ticket good for
two years, so you don't have to buy me anything. You just mind your
business, and I'll mind mine. All I want to do is ride the rings."

"Well, I'll take you up tonight. Then will you leave?"

"Hell, no. You're not taking me anywhere. Didn't you know I got my
pilot's license?"

"Oh, no. Don't tell me it's come to that. They didn't give you a
license!"

"Oh yes they did. Fifth try this year, and I finally made it. Nice
young inspector, took me out to dinner afterwards. First they set his
arm, but it wasn't my fault. Those damn asteroids can really pop up
out of nowhere. Well, Smitty, which is my domette?"

Socrates sighed. He had no choice. If he didn't let her stay she'd make
it her business to talk to Farquhart before she left. Then Farquhart
would say the place was unsafe because she had a license. And yet
Socrates wouldn't let her ride the rings. As simple as that.

He gave her a key. "Here. But do me a favor."

"What's that?"

"At least don't go up without letting me know. I want to be nearby.
Please--"

She nodded and skipped out of the room, laughing.

Socrates knew that if you stayed in the two bright rings, and if you
kept within the prescribed speed limit of three miles a second in the
rings, you'd be all right. But not Norma. She'd hop her rockets to
seven at the very least, and even though the sun blazed off each meteor
in the rings with the reflecting brilliance of a beacon, she'd be sure
to find some way to get into trouble--

Socrates wondered which would be better. If he murdered Norma her
social set would bring every detective in the System to Mimas, and if
he murdered Farquhart he'd have the government on his hands.

He drank a glass of Martian _thlomot_ and looked in the mirror. His
face was haggard. "You musn't think those thoughts, friend," he said.
"This is the twenty-third century."

       *       *       *       *       *

On Monday he took up five tourists, and his half dozen pilots were
equally busy. But everytime he came back he saw Farquhart at the port,
like an undertaker, looking to see if anyone had been injured.

"You liked it?" he'd say. "Izatso? Really liked it eh? Amazing--"

With dread, Socrates awaited the first space-sick tourist. That's all
it would take: one. Farquhart would be more than happy to brand Mimas
unsafe for tourists, Saturn's rings a hazard, and Mr. Socrates Smith a
nincompoop. Maybe it was because his brother owned a spa on Venus. Or
was it an exploratorium in the asteroid belt? His cousin?

But space was calm and remarkably free of ether-drift, and Socrates
thought that maybe, just maybe, everything would turn out all right.
Farquhart might leave, grumbling but satisfied, any day now. It all
depended on Norma. If Farquhart left before Norma decided she was ready
to ride the ring....

On Wednesday he spent six hours with Norma, dinner of a particularly
succulent Venusian reptile, Martian white wine, Earth trimmings. They
danced the archaic Mambo, which Socrates had revived after three
hundred years, and which showed every indication of sweeping the System
by storm. Surprisingly, Socrates had to admit to himself that he
enjoyed the evening, if only because he knew he had kept Norma busy.
That meant one more day and one more night in which she had not visited
the rings. It brought them one day closer to the time when Farquhart
would leave.

But the kiss was different. He kissed her goodnight outside her domette
and for a moment he forgot all about Farquhart. "I'll be damned," he
said. "I liked it."

"Umm," she said, and they kissed again.

Socrates released her, turned around, and began to walk down the path
through the artificial garden toward his own domette. She called after
him.

"Thanks for a lovely evening, Smitty."

"Don't mention it.

"You know what?"

"What?"

"I think I'll ride the rings tomorrow. Well, goodnight."

Socrates tried to say goodnight, but only gurgles came out.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was at the spacefield early in the morning. Morning on Mimas was,
of course, a relative term. It was morning on Mimas when the sun set,
because then the great bulk of Saturn came up over the horizon and
filled one third of the heavens, lighting the sky almost like the
noonday sun on Earth, its great triple ring spanning the void almost
from horizon to horizon.

The ring--and Norma wanted to ride it today! Socrates trembled a little
when he thought of this, but he knew that for a time at least he could
go about his business. He had checked Norma's domette and she had not
been there; but she had told him that she would not ride the rings
without letting him know. That much at least he could be sure of--Norma
would be as good as her word.

At the Administration Building, the Entwhistles awaited him. "Good
morning," Socrates said, trying to sound cheerful.

"Morning?" This was Mrs. Entwhistle, big and round and overbearing.
"How can it be morning? The sun just set."

Socrates explained to her, and then Mr. Entwhistle declared: "You must
never argue with a man who knows, my dear. That's his business, and if
he says it is morning, why then, it is morning."

"Well, who will it be?" Socrates said.

"Well--" Mr. Entwhistle began.

"Me," said Mrs. Entwhistle. "I want to go first because if it seems too
strenuous to me then I won't send Arnold. Is it strenuous, Mr. Smith?"

"Uh-uh. You got a medical exam on the inner worlds which okayed you for
outworld tourist travel. If you passed that you'll be fine here. Ready
any time you are, Mrs. Entwhistle."

Mrs. Entwhistle turned white under the sunburn which she evidently had
received on one of the Martian desert resorts. It was not uncommon:
many of the tourists seemed afraid at first--after all, you took a
flimsy little two-seater and jockeyed it among the tiny motes of
Saturn's rings. The word tiny, of course, could be confusing. Some of
those motes could make a two-man cruiser look like a small speck of
dust. If you didn't know how safe all that reflected sunlight was you'd
be afraid. But the light was sufficient, and an alert pilot simply had
to mind his business and you had nothing to worry about.

       *       *       *       *       *

Socrates got into his vac suit rapidly and adjusted the glassite helmet
over his head. He had the attendants bring an oversized suit for Mrs.
Entwhistle, although he did not tell her that was the case at all. The
vac suits represented the final precautionary measure. Any good pilot
could avoid the larger chunks with ease, but once in a long long while
a smaller particle might somehow elude the force-field which was there
to protect against it, and the vac suit assured all tourists of a
personal supply of air.

"All set, Mrs. Entwhistle?"

"Yes. Yes--only, you're sure it's safe?"

"I'd take my own wife--"

Mr. Entwhistle smiled. "You married? I didn't know you were married,
Mr. Smith."

"He's not. Can't you see that he's not married, Arnold?"

"I'm not," Socrates admitted. "But I'd cheerfully take my own mother.
You'll be safe, Mrs. Entwhistle."

Mrs. Entwhistle seemed a little taken aback by this remark, but
her husband said, "Be careful, Gertrude," and then they closed the
faceplate on her glassite helmet.

Socrates switched on his radio. "Can you hear me, Mrs. Entwhistle?"

"Yes. Yes, I can. Better be careful, that's all I can say."

"Relax. We'll start now."

Mrs. Entwhistle was bulky in her vac suit, and two attendants had to
help her through the narrow lock of the ship. After that Socrates saw
to it that she was strapped securely into her seat, and her face looked
peculiarly green under the lights of the instrument panel.

Socrates jumped outside to tell something to one of the attendants and
he saw Farquhart there waiting for him.

"Hello, Smith. Nice day."

"Yeah. How's it coming? Your investigation, I mean."

"Surprisingly, fine. I'd say that if everything checks through with a
clean bill of health today I'll be leaving on tomorrow morning's liner.
If."

Perhaps Farquhart had not meant the if to sound so ominous, but it came
out that way because Socrates immediately associated it with what Norma
had said the night before. He smiled a bit weakly now and readjusted
his helmet. Then he mumbled, "I'll see you on Ganymede in a few years,"
and he went back in through the lock.

       *       *       *       *       *

They cruised at fifteen miles a second, and within an hour they were
passing under the outer ring. Automatically he lowered their speed.

Mrs. Entwhistle craned her neck upward, and through the top of her
glassite helmet her face looked like a fish underwater. "I thought we
go _in_ the ring, Mr. Smith."

He nodded. "Of course we do. We're a thousand miles out now. See? If
you look carefully, you probably can see some of the bigger particles
shining."

"Um, yes."

"But we don't go in here. This is the outer ring and we pass under it.
We also go under Cassini's Division--the dark band which separates this
from the inner ring. I'll take you there, through the brighter ring, up
to the border of the crepe one. But then we turn back. That would be
dangerous."

"Why?"

"Because the crepe ring receives no sunlight. It's dark, that's why,
and we'd have to rely on radar to keep the ship out of trouble. It's
tricky business and it's dangerous. A little light flashes on and off
and it tells you which way to steer, but unless you can see what you're
doing--like you can in the bright ring, it's dangerous."

In another few minutes Socrates cut the ship sharply upward, and before
long the solid whiteness of the ring had been replaced by a chaos of
flying rock. That's what it looked like--huge boulders, ton piled upon
ton, and the closer they came, the faster the rocks seemed to move. In
another moment the rocks were below as well as above them, and Mrs.
Entwhistle screamed.

"What's the matter?"

"I'm afraid. Please, Mr. Smith--"

"You have nothing to worry about--"

"I can't help it if I'm afraid. Take me back!"

Socrates turned sharply and the ship zoomed through an empty space. The
rear port showed only a massive rock; it had been that close.... "If
you don't keep quiet. Please--"

"Take me back!"

Socrates had had a few cases like this, and taking the customer back
was comparatively simple. Although this bright ring was the largest,
and although it did have a longitudinal width of sixteen thousand
miles, its latitudinal depth was no more than ten miles. Now he gunned
the ship up and in a moment they hung poised in deep space above the
ring. "We'll stay clear of the ring and go back to Mimas--"

"Why?"

"You were afraid. You said so, that's why."

"Well, I changed my mind. What would all the girls on Earth say if they
knew I hadn't actually seen the ring? Take me back, Mr. Smith. I'll be
brave."

Socrates smiled. "That's a good girl," he said, and they dove again for
the brightness of the ring. But he almost wished she hadn't changed
her mind. Then he could have returned to the spacefield and watched for
Norma.

       *       *       *       *       *

He cut a zigzag course through the hurtling meteors. Someone, he knew,
had once bothered to chart all the tiny particles of the ring, but it
had taken a lifetime and it was far from accurate. Socrates preferred
the seat-of-the-pants method.

In less than two hours they had cut through the width of the ring and
ahead was darkness--darker, it seemed, than space itself.

"A thousand miles of void, and then the crepe ring," Socrates
explained. "We'll be turning back now. Fun, Mrs. Entwhistle?"

"Great," she agreed, but she had taken off the fishbowl helmet, and
now she was mopping her brow. "I must try it again sometime. In a few
years, of course--"

Socrates jammed down on the rocket pedal and the fore-tubes blasted
their fire against the blackness. The little ship shuddered and Mrs.
Entwhistle emitted a sound which could have been the shrill shriek of a
tea kettle. Then Socrates turned them slowly in a great arc so as not
to harm the delicate two-hundred pound creature sitting by his side
with too much acceleration.

Something flashed by beneath them. It could have been a meteor, except
that this was a void area. Attraction of the planet Mimas, and the
other satellites were such that no meteoric material could exist in
this space--which explained the thousand mile separation of the crepe
ring.

Yet something had passed them, something shining brilliantly with
reflected sunlight.

A ship! It could have been nothing but a spaceship.... Socrates knew he
had the only ships in the area, but the crepe ring was out of bounds.
The strange ship had been gunning for it at ten per--

Socrates barked into his radio:

"Hello, hello! Who's out here?"

The voice mocked him. "Who do you think?"

He didn't have to think at all, but he felt like crying. It was Norma.
"I thought you'd tell me when you went!"

"I tried to, honest. But you weren't on Mimas, Smitty. So I took off.
But don't worry. I've already been through the bright ring. Pretty nice
setup, Smitty."

"I'm glad you like it. But you're heading in the wrong direction now."
Ahead of them was the darkness which obscured part of Saturn's huge
bulk--the darkness of the uncharted and mysterious crepe ring.

"What do you mean? Isn't this the way to the dark ring?"

"That's just it. Mimas is the other way."

"Oh, pooh. You go back to Mimas with your ship if you want. I'd rather
see the inside of that dark ring. I'll say hello tonight, Smitty. Have
a good trip back with Mrs. Entwhistle--I checked the tourist log."

Socrates called "Wait" into his radio at least a dozen times, but there
was no answer.

Mrs. Entwhistle said, "Why is that crazy woman going into the crepe
ring?"

Socrates sighed. If Norma got hurt now, his entire venture out here
would be ruined. Farquhart would see to that. Besides, quite suddenly,
he did not want Norma to get hurt. Not at all. Not ever. Maybe he was
crazy--but he liked the girl.

"What," he demanded of Mrs. Entwhistle, "is wrong with the crepe ring?"

"Now, that's a silly question. You told me yourself it was dangerous.
No one can see anything or some such thing--"

"Ha, ha, ha. I was joking. Good joke--but it's the best part of the
trip. In fact, the trip is incomplete without it. I've saved it for
last."

"So why are you trembling, Mr. Smith?"

"Nothing. It's nothing at all. Just get back into your helmet and I'll
show you what the inside of the crepe ring is like. Go ahead, Mrs.
Entwhistle. It isn't everyone who gets a chance to see the inside of
the crepe ring...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The darkness of space was pleasant by comparison. Here there were vague
flitting shadows, the half-seen images of huge masses of rock and metal
hurtling through space in their eternal revolution around Saturn. One
would be more than enough to crush their little ship--and Norma's....

Socrates hardly had time to think of it, hardly had time to hear Mrs.
Entwhistle whimpering with each sudden burst of acceleration. On and
off overhead the red and the green lights winked, and Socrates played
on the firing pedals like an organist, trying to blast their way clear
of the unseen rocks all about them. Once a yellow light winked and he
knew that one of the meteoric pebbles had streaked through their ship:
it now was an airless place, and only their flimsy spacesuits stood
between them and the cold, beckoning void of space.

Someone was shouting, and at first he thought it was Mrs. Entwhistle....

Norma!

"Hey, Smitty!"

"Yes. Yes, Norma."

"I can see you back there. See me?"

"Ahead a bit? Yeah, I see you." Her ship flashed once and then was
gone in the obscuring darkness, but it flashed again, and this time he
probed out with a beam of radar and he held it.

"I'm glad you see me, Smitty, because I think you'll have to come and
get me. I'm scared. My ship's a mess, gutted with holes. This place
is--awful."

Socrates muttered to himself and pushed the aft pedals to the floor.
Mrs. Entwhistle was slammed back in her seat and Socrates could see
that she was trying to scream, only she couldn't quite make it.

Only the green light flashed now, because the red-warning signal
remained bright: it lit the way to Norma. A score of miles, but their
zigzag course would make it more like several hundred--if they got
there. Socrates' insides began to hurt from the acceleration. His feet
were numb from working the pedals. Green light, step down, right, left,
again, green, aft pedal, aft pedal!... Socrates soon realized that he
was talking to himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joining air locks in space was at best a ticklish business, but with
the added hazard of the meteors, Socrates did not know if it could be
done. He only knew one thing. It _had_ to be done. Norma's ship could
have been a derelict for all the activity it showed, and while it had
been pelted thus far only with smaller stones, one big rock would be
more than enough to prove fatal.

They crept forward slowly, it seemed, inches at a time--and three times
he had almost locked the two ships together, but at the last moment
he had to swing away. The action would force the other ship back as
well, and a massive chunk of cosmic debris would zoom through the void
between them. Close....

He locked them together finally, and then, vaguely, he remembered
running for the airlock. He found it, pulled the catch and opened
Norma's lock from the outside. He stood for a moment within her ship.

She was slumped over the pilot chair in her spacesuit. He ran to her
and lifted her across his shoulder, heading back for the lock. Then
he was through it and Norma sat on the floor, partly conscious, in
his own ship. He ran forward to the controls, pushing aside Mrs.
Entwhistle--who had fallen across both chairs, breaking her strap in
the process.

He fired all the aft rockets at once, blasting straight up towards the
top of the ring.

In seconds they were clear, but not before he had seen a huge, almost
spherical meteor grind into and through Norma's ship....

       *       *       *       *       *

Both women were conscious when they reached the spaceport. Socrates
smiled at Mrs. Entwhistle.

"Yes sir, you're a lucky young lady."

"Lucky? I feel almost dead."

"Ridiculous! You were the only tourist ever taken through that ring,
the crepe ring. You'll be famous. Wait until you tell all your friends.
I only took you because you seemed so obviously brave...."

"Go ahead," Norma chided, "pile it on, pile it on--"

Socrates told her, in his severest tones, that he'd get to her later.
After that, he was busy bringing the little ship down on Mimas' one
spacefield.

Mr. Entwhistle and Farquhart met them when they landed. The smaller,
thinner man seemed worried, but now he took his wife's hand and asked
her, "How did you like it?"

Socrates waited breathlessly. If Farquhart found out....

"I loved it!" Mrs. Entwhistle fairly shrieked. "Wait until you hear,
Arnold--and wait until we get back to Earth. We'll leave at once, on
tomorrow's liner. After I tell Aunt Sophie--"

"See?" Socrates turned to Farquhart.

"Um, I must admit it looks good this time, Smith. What about you, Miss?"

Norma grinned. "I had quite a time, quite a time. _My_ ship--"

Socrates kissed her soundly on the lips, and whatever else she might
have said was lost in the hurried smacking sound.

Farquhart cleared his throat. "I never knew you took two passengers up
at once, Smith. And I didn't see her before--"

"She's here, isn't she?"

"Umm--"

"You never know what we'll do here on Mimas...."

"Umm, well--I guess you're in order this time, Smith. Good luck."

Norma said, "My ship--"

Socrates kissed her again. Then he said. "If you don't shut up I think
I'll have to marry you. That's exactly what I'll have to do...."

Norma's eyes glowed at him. "As I was saying, darling, _our_ ship...."

This time she was kissing him.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RIDE THE CREPE RING ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Observer in the Near East, by William Le
Queux

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: An Observer in the Near East

Author: William Le Queux

Release Date: July 5, 2021 [eBook #65766]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: KD Weeks, Tim Lindell, University of Oregon Libraries and the
             Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
             (This file was produced from images generously made available
             by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN OBSERVER IN THE NEAR EAST ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Footnotes have
been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are referenced

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------








                              An Observer
                              in the
                              Near East








------------------------------------------------------------------------

                   =Unwin’s Colonial Library.=

 271. =The Seven Streams.= By WARWICK DEEPING.
 272. =Love in the Lists.= By K. L. MONTGOMERY (Author of “The
   Cardinal’s Pawn”).
 273. =The Pride o’ the Morning.= By AGNES GIBERNE.
 274. =The Web of the Past.= By the COUNTESS OF CROMARTIE.
 275. =Saints in Society.= By MARGARET BAILLIE-SAUNDERS.
 276. =A Supreme Moment.= By Mrs. HAMILTON SYNGE.
 277. =The Fatal Ring.= By DICK DONOVAN.
 278. =The Procession of Life.= By HORACE A. VACHELL (Author of
   “Brothers,” “The Hill,” etc.).
 279. =The Rise of Philip Barrett.= By DAVID LYALL.
 280. =Beggar’s Luck.= By NELLIE K. BLISSETT.
 281. =The Marquis’s Eye.= By G. F. BRADBY.
 282. =The Parson’s Wood.= By VIOLET A. SIMPSON.
 283. =Captain Maroon.= By ROBERT STUART.
 284. =The Third Kiss.= By HERBERT FLOWERDEW.
 285. =The Difficult Way.= By MABEL DEARMER.
 286. =Dick Pentreath.= By KATHARINE TYNAN.
 287. =The Princess Priscilla’s Fortnight.= By the Author of “Elizabeth
   and Her German Garden.”
 288. =The Flight of Georgiana.= By R. N. STEPHENS.
 289. =The Lady Noggs, Peeress.= By EDGAR JEPSON (Author of “The
   Admirable Tinker”).
 290. =A Dazzling Reprobate.= By W. R. H. TROWBRIDGE.
 291. =The Lapse of Vivien Eady.= By CHARLES MARRIOTT.
 292. =The Smiths of Surbiton.= By KEBLE HOWARD. Illustrated.
 293. =The Blue Peter.= By MORLEY ROBERTS.
 294. =Fanny Lambert.= By H. DE VERE STACPOOLE.
 295. =A Son of Arvon.= By GWENDOLEN PRICE. A Welsh Story.
 296. =A Millionaire’s Courtship.= By Mrs. ARCHIBALD LITTLE.
 297. =An American Duchess.= By ARABELLA KENEALY.
 298. =The Adventures of a Supercargo.= By LOUIS BECKE.
 299. =Cecilia’s Lovers.= By AMELIA E. BARR.
 300. =The Grey Domino.= By Mrs. CHAMPION DE CRESPIGNY.
 301. =The Prey of the Strongest.= By MORLEY ROBERTS.

 302. =Men at Arms.= By Major W. P. DRURY.
 303. =Sons of the Milesians.= By the COUNTESS OF CROMARTIE.
 304. =A Double Marriage.= By LUCAS CLEEVE.
 305. =The House in Spring Gardens.= By Major ARTHUR GRIFFITHS.
 306. =Whispers about Women.= By LEONARD MERRICK.
 307. =Latter-Day Sweethearts.= By Mrs. BURTON HARRISON.
 308. =Law not Justice.= By FLORENCE WARDEN.
 309. =An Impetuous Girl.= By ADELINE SERGEANT.
 310. =Man and Maid.= By E. NESBIT.
 311. =Raffles, the Amateur Cracksman.= By E. W. HORNUNG.
 312. =The Nymph.= By F. DICKBERRY (Author of “The Storm of London”).
 313. =New Treasure Seekers.= By E. NESBIT. Illustrated.
 314. =Counsels of the Night.= By LUCAS CLEEVE.
 315. =The Dream and the Business.= By JOHN OLIVER HOBBES.
 316. =A Matrimonial Lottery.= By C. O’CONOR ECCLES.
 317. =Lady Fitzmaurice’s Husband.= By ARABELLA KENEALY.
 318. =Silas Strong.= By IRVING BACHELLER (Author of “Eben Holden”).
 319. =A Drama in Sunshine.= By HORACE A. VACHELL (Author of
   “Brothers”).
 320. =Saba Macdonald.= By “RITA.”
 321. =The Whip Hand.= By KEBLE HOWARD (Author of “The Smiths of
   Surbiton”).
 322. =The Woman Thou Gavest.= By LADY TROUBRIDGE.
 323. =The Crystal Age.= By W. H. HUDSON.
 324. =The Soul Stealer.= By C. RANGER GULL (GUY THORNE).
 325. =A Gamble with Life.= By SILAS K. HOCKING.
 326. =The Great Court Scandal.= By WILLIAM LE QUEUX.
 327. =The Iron Gates.= By ANNIE E. HOLDSWORTH.
 328. =At the Sign of the Peacock.= By K. C. RYVES.
 329. =The Red Burgee.= By MORLEY ROBERTS.
 330. =The Modern Way.= By Mrs. W. K. CLIFFORD.
 331. =Success in Life.= By Dr. EMIL REICH.
 332. =The Sins of Society.= By FATHER BERNARD VAUGHAN.
 333. =The New Chronicles of Don “Q.”= By K. and HESKETH PRICHARD.

                        LONDON: T. FISHER UNWIN.
  NOTE.—_A List of the Colonial Library, Nos. 1 to 270, can be had on
                             application._

[Illustration: HIS MAJESTY KING PETER I. OF SERVIA.]

                             AN OBSERVER IN
                             THE NEAR EAST








               _ILLUSTRATED BY PHOTOGRAPHS BY THE AUTHOR
                   AND PRINCESS XENIA OF MONTENEGRO_








                           _COLONIAL EDITION_
    (_This Edition is for Circulation in the British Colonies only_)








                                 LONDON
                            T. FISHER UNWIN
                            ADELPHI TERRACE
                                  1907




                         _All rights reserved_




                                PREFACE


The reason of the anonymity of this book is obvious. Revealing as it
does the actual state of affairs in the Balkan Peninsula in this present
year of grace 1907, it contains many plain truths and much outspoken
criticism.

By a long journey of close, confidential inquiry through Montenegro,
Northern Albania, Dalmatia, Bosnia, Herzegovina, Servia, Bulgaria,
Roumania, Turkey, and Macedonia, I have, at risk of betraying certain
information imparted to me under seal of secrecy, endeavoured to place
the actual and serious truth before English readers, and thus render
complicated questions, such as Bulgaria and the Exarchate, more
intelligible than heretofore.

Private audiences were granted me by the various kings and princes of
the Balkan States, and by His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, as well as by
almost each member of the various Cabinets in turn, so that I was
enabled to gather information, some of which is, of course, known in the
chancelleries of Europe, while other facts will probably come as a
revelation, even to Balkan diplomats themselves.

What I was told in one country was often contradicted in the next. Yet,
possessing many “friends at Court,” I was afforded unique facilities for
studying, in each country, the various questions on the spot. My
inspection of the Servian prisons, in company with the Minister of
Justice, was, for instance, the first occasion upon which a foreigner
has been allowed to study the penal system in that country; while I am,
I believe, the only Englishman to visit and be the guest of those wild
brigandish tribes of Northern Albania.

The secret aims and aspirations of the various Balkan States herein
explained are based upon actual information gathered from confidential
and reliable sources. The exposure of the shameful German and Austrian
intrigues is no mere idle denunciation, but are actual facts, as
revealed to me by certain Cabinet Ministers and other persons equally
responsible, and supported by documentary evidence which I have had
through my own hands.

As regards that land of terror, fire, and sword, Macedonia, I can only
say that I have spared the reader many horrifying details and
photographs of what I saw there with my own eyes. The blood of those
poor defenceless women and children who are daily slaughtered by Greek
bands cries aloud to Europe for vengeance.

Will there be war between Bulgaria and Turkey during the present year?

To arrive at a definite conclusion upon that very serious point was one
of the chief objects of my inquiry, and this record of its
result—injudicious though I may be in putting it in print—will probably
be read with interest by many to whom the Near East, with its mysteries,
its constant plots, and its tangled politics, is as a closed book.

All through the Balkan Peninsula the weak are to-day being crushed by
the strong. The Austrian Eagle has overshadowed and grasped Bosnia, she
has her talons into Servia, and is casting covetous glances upon gallant
little Montenegro. On the other hand, as part of the secret policy of
Christian Germany in her advance southward, the poor defenceless
Macedonians are being daily outraged, murdered, or burned alive—the true
facts being always suppressed and the news scarcely ever being allowed
to leak out—while the Kaiser every day lifts his eyes to Heaven,
implores the Divine aid, and consigns the destinies of his Empire to the
direction of the Almighty!

To Germany, in great measure, is the present terrible state of Macedonia
due. Her diplomacy at the Sublime Porte has recently exposed, beyond all
doubt, that she secretly aids Greece and abets the Greek bands in their
nefarious work of outrage, murder, and extermination.

The Kaiser could, by simply lifting his hand, stem the blood-lust of
those armed hordes, and bring peace and security to the Macedonian
population. But his secret policy is to create disorder in that
terror-stricken country, so that Bulgaria and Turkey must be compelled,
ere long, to fly at each other’s throats.

Therefore he closes his Imperial eyes to those scenes of wanton
slaughter that daily are a disgrace to our civilisation in this
twentieth century, and matters are rapidly going from bad to worse.




SOFIA, _April 1907_.




                                CONTENTS

                                -------

                               MONTENEGRO


                                CHAPTER I
                           THE CITY IN THE SKY

                                                                    PAGE

 Why I went to the Balkans—The road to Montenegro—Cettinje and its
   petroleum tins—About the blood-feud—England and
   Montenegro—Warned not to attempt to go to Albania—My guide a
   marked man—The story of Tef—A woman’s fickleness, and its
   sequel                                                             19

                               CHAPTER II
                     AN AUDIENCE OF PRINCE NICHOLAS

 The Palace at Cettinje—A cigarette with the Prince—The policy of
   Montenegro—A confidential chat—His Royal Highness’s admiration
   for England—His views upon Macedonia—He urges me not to attempt
   to go to Albania, but I persuade him to help me—His Highness’s
   kindness—Souvenirs                                                 29


                            NORTHERN ALBANIA


                                CHAPTER I
                          INTO A SAVAGE REGION

 Wildest Albania—Warnings not to attempt to travel there—I decide
   to go, and take Palok—Prince Nicholas of Montenegro bids us
   farewell—On the Lake of Scutari—Arrival at Skodra—Passports,
   rabble, and backsheesh—Photographing the fortress in
   secret—Treading dangerous ground—Albania the Unknown               41


                               CHAPTER II
                           WHERE LIFE IS CHEAP

 Fired at in the street of Skodra—My comfortless inn—Panorama of
   life—Armed bands of wild mountaineers in the streets—The Sign
   of the Cross—-Scutarine people—The fascination of Skodra—In the
   den of my friend Salko—Making purchases—Short shrift with
   swindlers—Some genuine antiques—Ragged and shoeless soldiers of
   the Sultan—Men shot in the blood-feud—“It is nothing!”             48

                               CHAPTER III
                            THE LAWLESS LAND

 My friend Pietro—Visit to his house—His wife and sister-in-law
   unveil and are photographed—Scutarine hospitality—Forbidden
   newspapers—I get one in secret—The Turkish post office—I want
   to visit the Accursed Mountains—Difficulties and fears—The
   Feast of the Madonna—Christians and Mohammedans—My first
   meeting with the dreaded Skreli—Shots in the night                 58

                               CHAPTER IV
                        IN THE ACCURSED MOUNTAINS

 Vatt Marashi, chief of the Skreli tribe, invites me to become his
   guest—Our start for the Accursed Mountains—Rok, our
   guide—Independence of the Skreli—Brigandage and the _bessa_—A
   night under a rock—My meeting with Vatt Marashi and his
   band—The Skreli welcome—How they treat the Turks—Vatt’s
   admissions—I become the guest of brigands—A chat in the
   moonlight                                                          68

                                CHAPTER V
                        LIFE WITH A BRIGAND BAND

 The Skreli a lawless tribe—No man’s life safe unless the chief
   gives his word—Vatt prophesies a rising against the Turks—Our
   walks and talks—Our meeting with our neighbours the Kastrati,
   and with Dêd Presci their chief—A girl who avenged her
   husband’s death—The significant story of Kol—Manners and
   customs of the wild tribes—Farewell to my good friend Dêd—An
   incident a fortnight later                                         81


                         BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

                                CHAPTER I
                            SOME REVELATIONS

 Through Dalmatia to Herzegovina—Over the Balkan watershed—Bosnia
   and Sarayevo—A half-Turkish, half-Servian town—Austrian
   persecution of the Christians—Some astounding facts—A land of
   spies and scandals—The police as murderers—A disgrace to
   European civilisation                                              95

                               CHAPTER II
                       DUST IN THE EYES OF EUROPE

 How spies work in Bosnia—Secret agents dog the stranger’s
   footsteps—My own experience—Fighting the spy with his own
   weapons—To “nobble” the foreigner—How an unfavourable book was
   purchased by the Austrian Government—Bribery of Press
   correspondents—A country worse than Russia—Some suggested
   reforms—The secret policy of Austria in the Balkans               108


                                 SERVIA


                                CHAPTER I
                         THE TRUTH ABOUT SERVIA

 The diplomatic circle in Belgrade—Studying both sides of the
   Servian question—Austrian intrigue—113 known foreign spies in
   Belgrade!—An illustration of the work of secret agents—Quaint
   Servian customs—Pauperism unknown—Servia to-day and to-morrow     119

                               CHAPTER II
                        AN AUDIENCE OF KING PETER

 At the New Konak—I sign His Majesty’s birthday-book—The
   audience-chamber—King Peter greets me, and we chat over
   cigarettes—My private audience—His Majesty and English
   capitalists—Great openings for British enterprise—The King
   gives me some instances of paying concerns, and tells me many
   interesting facts—His Majesty invites me to return                130

                               CHAPTER III
                      SERVIA’S AIMS AND ASPIRATIONS

 Audiences of M. Pachitch, the Premier and “strong man” of Servia,
   and of M. Stoyanovitch, Minister of Commerce—My friend, Dr.
   Milenko Vesnitch, Minister of Justice—The Servian case as I
   found it—Austria Servia’s arch-enemy—Dr. Vesnitch a smart
   up-to-date politician—Undeniable prosperity of the country
   under King Peter’s rule                                           136

                               CHAPTER IV
                          THE FUTURE OF SERVIA

 Servia and the Macedonian question—A sound Cabinet—England and
   Servia—Appointment of Mr. Beethom Whitehead as British Minister
   very gratifying to the Servians—King Peter ever solicitous for
   the welfare of the people—What the Prime Minister told me
   concerning the future—The new railway to the Adriatic             146

                                CHAPTER V
                     TO-DAY AND TO-MORROW IN SERVIA

 A retrospect—A sitting of the Skupshtina—Peasants as
   deputies—Servia as an open field for British
   enterprise—Enormous mineral wealth—Mr. Finney, a mining
   engineer who has prospected in Servia for seventeen years,
   tells me some interesting facts regarding rich mines awaiting
   development—No adventurers need apply                             157


                                BULGARIA


                                CHAPTER I
                             SOFIA OF TO-DAY

 At the Bulgarian frontier—A chat with M. Etienne, French
   ex-Minister of War—Evening in Sofia—A city of rapid
   progress—Engaging peasants for Earl’s Court Exhibition—Amusing
   episodes—Social life in Sofia—The diplomats’ club—The Bulgarian
   Government grant me special facilities for investigation          181

                               CHAPTER II
               BULGARIA AS A FIELD FOR BRITISH ENTERPRISE

 Audiences of members of the Bulgarian Cabinet—Dr. Dimitri
   Stancioff, Minister for Foreign Affairs, the coming man of
   Bulgaria—His policy—Facts about the mineral wealth and mining
   laws—Advice to traders and capitalists by the British
   Vice-Consul in Sofia—Our methods as compared with those of
   other nations                                                     191

                               CHAPTER III
                       WILL BULGARIA DECLARE WAR?

 A sitting of the Sobranje—Declarations by the late Prime Minister
   Petkoff and Dr. Stancioff—The new Minister of Foreign Affairs—A
   sound progressive government—Strong army and firm policy—Will
   the deplorable state of Macedonia still be tolerated?—Ominous
   words                                                             197

                               CHAPTER IV
                  THE BULGARIAN EXARCHATE AND THE PORTE

 A difficult and little-understood problem—Bulgaria the “dark
   horse” of the Peninsula—An explanation of the question between
   Bulgaria and Turkey—The Bulgarian Church and the Imperial
   Firman—The present position of the Exarchate—Europe should
   listen to the Bulgarian demand—Chats with Macedonian
   orphans—Their terrible stories                                    206

                                CHAPTER V
                          AT A ROSE DISTILLERY

 Tobacco growing in Bulgaria—The otto-of-rose industry—About
   adulteration—Difficulties of obtaining the pure
   extract—Corrupting the peasant—What Monsieur Shipkoff told
   me—Some tests to discover adulteration—Interesting facts about
   roses                                                             217

                               CHAPTER VI
                         THE FUTURE OF BULGARIA

 Bulgaria’s future greatness—Her firm policy in Macedonia—An
   audience of Dr. Stancioff, Minister of Foreign Affairs—A chat
   with the Prime Minister—Turkey the enemy of Bulgaria—Balkan
   “news” in the London papers—How it is manufactured—Turkish
   dominion doomed                                                   226


                                ROUMANIA


                                CHAPTER I
                           BUCHAREST OF TO-DAY

 My friend the spy—How I was watched through the Balkans—An
   exciting half-hour—The Paris of the Near East—Gaiety,
   extravagance, and pretty women—Forty years of progress—The
   paradise of the idler—Husbands wanted!                            235

                               CHAPTER II
                     ROUMANIA’S AIMS AND INTENTIONS

 Monsieur Take Jonesco, Minister of Finance—The smartest man in
   Roumania—An interview with General Lahovary, Minister of
   Foreign Affairs—Secret aims of Roumania—A better frontier
   wanted—Germany’s insincerity—Some plain truths—The question of
   a Balkan Federation—Oil wells waiting to be exploited by
   British capital                                                   244


                               CHAPTER III
                    A CHAT WITH THE QUEEN OF ROUMANIA

 The royal drawing-room—Her Majesty’s greeting—Her kind words of
   welcome—Roumania not in the Balkan States—We talk politics—The
   name of “Carmen Sylva”—The Queen’s deep interest in the
   blind—She shows me some photographs—Public interest in the new
   institution—I visit it next day                                   253


                                 TURKEY


                                CHAPTER I
                       THE LAND OF THE WANING MOON

 The Orient Express again—On the Black Sea to Constantinople—A
   disenchantment—My dragoman—How to bribe the Customs
   officers—Mud and dogs—A city of spies—Feebleness of British
   policy at the Porte—Turkish adoration of Germany—The basis of
   my confidential inquiries                                         265

                               CHAPTER II
                         IN SEARCH OF THE TRUTH

 His Excellency Noury Pasha—A quiet chat at his home—Turkish view
   of European criticism—The Turk misunderstood—The massacres in
   Macedonia—My visit to the Sublime Porte—His Excellency Tewfik
   Pasha tells me the truth—A great diplomatist—The fashion to
   denounce Turkey—The attitude of the Porte towards
   Bulgaria—Significant words                                        274


                                MACEDONIA


                                CHAPTER I
                      PLAIN TRUTHS ABOUT MACEDONIA

 War imminent between Bulgaria and Turkey—My secret
   inquiries—Atrocities by the Greek bands—Chats with the leaders
   of the insurrection—The truth about the intrigues in
   Macedonia—I visit the scene of the massacres—Stories told to
   me—Horrifying facts—Germany behind the assassins—A disgraceful
   truth                                                             285


                               CHAPTER II
                            THE TRUTH EXPOSED

 Summary of my confidential information—War this year—The attitude
   of Greece, Bulgaria, Roumania, and Turkey—Procrastination,
   promises, and perfect politeness—A matter more serious than
   Macedonia—Warning to British statesmen and the public—The real
   truth exposed—Germany and India                                   299




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    PAGE
 HIS MAJESTY KING PETER OF SERVIA                         _Frontispiece_
 MAP OF THE AUTHOR’S ROUTE THROUGH THE NEAR EAST                      16
 PERO, MY MONTENEGRIN DRIVER                                          20
 ALBANIANS IN CETTINJE                                                20
 THE ROYAL PALACE, CETTINJE                                           24
 PRINCIPAL STREET IN CETTINJE                                         24
 HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE NICHOLAS OF MONTENEGRO                     28
 THE PETROLEUM TINS OF CETTINJE                                       32
 THE MONASTERY, CETTINJE                                              32
 MR. CHAS. DES GRAZ, CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES AT CETTINJE                    34
 THE PIAZZA, RAGUSA                                                   34
 RYEKA, MONTENEGRO                                                    42
 ZABLIAK, MONTENEGRO                                                  42
 PALOK, MY COMPANION THROUGH THE SKRELI COUNTRY                       44
 IN SKODRA (TWO VIEWS)                                                48
 MY FRIEND SALKO OUTSIDE HIS HOUSE IN SKODRA                          54
 PIETRO’S SISTER-IN-LAW UNVEILED BEFORE THE CAMERA                    54
 ROK, TRIBESMAN OF THE SKRELI                                         58
 PIETRO LEKHA                                                         58
 THE MADONNA OF SKODRA                                                64
 THE PROCESSION WITH AN ARMED GUARD                                   64
 THE MIREDITI: AN ALARM!                                              66
 THE MIREDITI AT PRAYER                                               66
 MY ROAD IN NORTHERN ALBANIA                                          70
 THE WAY TO THE SKRELI                                                70
 VATT MARASHI, CHIEF OF THE SKRELI TRIBE                              74
 THE SKRELI AT HOME                                                   76
 AN ALBANIAN VILLAGE                                                  76
 AMONG THE SKRELI: LÛK AND HIS FRIENDS                                80
 MRIKA, THE WOMAN WHO CARRIED ON THE BLOOD-FEUD                       84
 MY BODYGUARD IN NORTHERN ALBANIA                                     90
 BUNAQUELLE, BOSNIA                                                   96
 JAJACE, BOSNIA                                                       96
 SARAYEVO, BOSNIA                                                    112
 IN HERZEGOVINA                                                      112
 HIS EXCELLENCY NICHOLAS PACHITCH, PRIME MINISTER OF                 120
   SERVIA
 HIS EXCELLENCY DR. MILENKO VESNITCH, SERVIAN MINISTER               124
   OF JUSTICE
 HIS EXCELLENCY COSTA STOYANOVITCH, SERVIAN MINISTER OF              126
   COMMERCE
 THE ROYAL PALACE, BELGRADE: THE BALLROOM                            130
 ROYAL PALACE, BELGRADE (EXTERIOR)                                   132
 PRINCIPAL BOULEVARD OF BELGRADE                                     132
 HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE GEORGE OF SERVIA                          134
 MR. BEETHOM WHITEHEAD, BRITISH MINISTER AT BELGRADE                 138
 MR. ALEX. TUCKER, SERVIAN CONSUL-GENERAL IN LONDON                  138
 THE ROAD TO THE EAST: THE LAST VIEW OF EUROPE                       144
 VILLAGERS AND GIPSIES IN MIRIAVO (SERVIA)                           144
 THE BRITISH LEGATION, BELGRADE                                      148
 THE KNES MIHAJELOWA, BELGRADE                                       148
 IN THE “KALEMEGDAN,” BELGRADE                                       160
 THE MARKET-PLACE, BELGRADE                                          160
 HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE FERDINAND OF BULGARIA                     180
 PEASANTS IN SOFIA MARKET-PLACE                                      182
 THE OLD MOSQUE, SOFIA                                               182
 HIS EXCELLENCY DR. DIMITRI STANCIOFF, BULGARIAN                     184
   MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
 THE LATE MONSIEUR D. PETKOFF, PRIME MINISTER OF                     188
   BULGARIA
 THE ROYAL PALACE, SOFIA                                             190
 THE MAIN BOULEVARD, SOFIA                                           190
 HIS EXCELLENCY N. GHENADIEFF, BULGARIAN MINISTER OF                 192
   COMMERCE
 EARLY MORNING IN SOFIA                                              194
 ON THE ROAD TO THE SHIPKA                                           194
 THE BULGARIAN SOBRANJE                                              196
 GEN. MICHAEL SAVOFF, BULGARIAN MINISTER OF WAR                      198
 HIS EXCELLENCY L. PAYACOFF, BULGARIAN MINISTER OF                   200
   FINANCE
 SIR GEORGE BUCHANAN, BRITISH MINISTER AT SOFIA                      200
 MILITARY MANŒUVRES IN BULGARIA (TWO VIEWS)                          204
 PEASANTS AT VLADAJA, BULGARIA                                       208
 BULGARIAN MILITARY TYPES                                            208
 PEASANTS NEAR TIRNOVO, BULGARIA                                     210
 TZIGANES ON THE ISKER ROAD                                          214
 WHERE I SPENT A COMFORTLESS NIGHT IN BULGARIA                       216
 BULGARIAN LAUNDRESSES                                               216
 THE ROSE-FIELDS NEAR KAZANLIK                                       220
 GATHERING ROSES AT KAZANLIK                                         224
 TESTING OTTO-OF-ROSE AT KAZANLIK                                    224
 BULGARIAN PEASANTS DANCING THE “HORO”                               226
 SUMMIT OF THE SHIPKA PASS                                           228
 DEFILE OF THE ISKER                                                 228
 HIS MAJESTY KING CHARLES OF ROUMANIA                                234
 SNAP-SHOTS IN BUCHAREST (TWO VIEWS)                                 236
 THE ROYAL PALACE, BUCHAREST                                         240
 BOULEVARD ELISABETA, BUCHAREST                                      240
 HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE CANTACUZEN, ROUMANIAN PRIME                   244
   MINISTER
 HIS EXCELLENCY TAKE JONESCO, ROUMANIAN MINISTER OF                  244
   FINANCE
 HIS EXCELLENCY GEO. G. MANU, ROUMANIAN MINISTER OF WAR              246
 SIR CONYNGHAM GREENE, BRITISH MINISTER AT BUCHAREST                 246
 GEN. JACQUES LAHOVARY, ROUMANIAN MINISTER OF FOREIGN                248
   AFFAIRS
 HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF ROUMANIA                                   252
 THE QUEEN OF ROUMANIA’S BLIND INSTITUTE AT BUCHAREST                256
 BLIND INMATES AT WORK                                               260
 HIS EXCELLENCY TEWFIK PASHA, MINISTER OF FOREIGN                    264
   AFFAIRS OF THE IMPERIAL OTTOMAN EMPIRE
 HIS EXCELLENCY NOURY PASHA                                          274
 THE ENTRANCE TO THE BOSPHORUS                                       280
 IN CONSTANTINOPLE                                                   280
 LAKE OF OCHRIDA, MACEDONIA                                          285
 LAKE OF PRESBA, MACEDONIA                                           285
 MACEDONIAN WOMAN ABDUCTED BY TURKS FROM KLENE, NEAR                 288
   DEBR, AND RESCUED BY A BULGARIAN BAND
 GENERAL TZONTCHEFF, THE BULGARIAN LEADER IN MACEDONIA               288
 A BULGARIAN BAND IN MACEDONIA                                       292
 GENERAL TZONTCHEFF IN MACEDONIA                                     304
 THE TURKISH BURIAL-GROUND AT SCUTARI, ASIA MINOR                    304

[Illustration:

  THE NEAR EAST

  _Stanford’s Geog^{l.} Estab^{t.}, London._
  London: Eveleigh Nash.
]




                               MONTENEGRO




                               CHAPTER I
                          THE CITY IN THE SKY

Why I went to the Balkans—The road to Montenegro—Cettinje and its
    petroleum tins—About the blood-feud—England and Montenegro—Warned
    not to attempt to go to Albania—My guide a marked man—The story of
    Tef—A woman’s fickleness, and its sequel.


I entered the Balkans by the back door. The luxuries of the Orient
Express had no attraction for me. I wanted to see the Balkans as they
really are, those great, wild, mountainous countries, so full of race
hatreds, of political bickerings, of fierce blood-feuds, of feverish
propagandas—those nations with their interesting monarchs and their many
mysteries.

The “Orient” runs direct from Paris to the Balkan capitals, it is true,
but if one goes to study a people the capital is not the only place in
which to discover the truth. One must go into the country, move among
the peasantry, hear their grievances and investigate their wrongs.
Therefore I decided to enter the East by Montenegro, and also visit the
wild and little-known regions of Northern Albania.

The comfortable voyage by the Austrian-Lloyd mail steamer _Graf
Wurmbrand_ from Trieste down the Adriatic, touching at Pola, the
Austrian naval station, Lussinpiccolo, Zara—famed for its
maraschino—Sebenico, Spalato, and Gravosa to Cattaro, has been already
described by many writers. Suffice it to say that it is perhaps one of
the most picturesque of pleasure-trips in the world, for every moment
one has a fresh panorama of mountain and blue sea, of green, fertile
islands with subtropical vegetation, and tiny white villages nestling at
the sea’s edge, as the steamer threads her way through the narrow and
often difficult channels.

At times the wild scenery, especially in the Bocche di Cattaro, reminds
the traveller of the Norwegian fiords, and at others the coast is an
almost exact reproduction of the French Riviera.

The object of my journey was, however, not in order to write a mere
description of men and places. There have been other travellers in the
Balkans who have related their story, therefore my mission was to make
careful inquiry into the present unsettled state of affairs, try and
discover the grievances of both sides, and endeavour to obtain from the
rulers and statesmen of the various nations their aspirations for the
future. This I succeeded in doing, for the various monarchs of the
Balkans graciously gave me audience; and from their Ministers, from the
middle classes, and from the peasants, I was enabled at last to form
some conclusion as to the real situation—political, economical, social,
and financial.

The writer who attempts to place the various Balkan questions
impartially and clearly before the public will at once find himself
utterly confused, and wallowing wildly in a morass of misstatement and
misrepresentation. The Balkans are torn by race hatreds, party strife,
and the intrigues of the Powers. The Turk hates the Bulgar, the Serb
hates the Austrian, the Roumanian hates the Greek, the Albanian hates
the Montenegrin, the Bosnian hates the Turk, while the Macedonian hates
everybody all round. What is told to one authoritatively one hour, is
flatly contradicted the next; therefore it is not in the least
surprising that in the European Press there have been so many
misstatements about the various Balkan questions, the real truth being
so very difficult to obtain.

[Illustration: Pero, my Montenegrin Driver.]

[Illustration: Albanians in Cettinje.]

I have, however, endeavoured to obtain it, and at risk of being
injudicious, to place before the reader the facts as they are, without
any political bias, or any seeking to gloss over the many glaring
defects of administration of which I have myself been witness.

To describe the beauties of the Bocche di Cattaro, that series of
winding channels where the high grey mountains rise sheer from the
water, would be only to traverse old ground. Suffice it to say that I
landed at Cattaro on a bright, sunny noon, and found upon the quay a
tall, lean mountaineer who had been sent to meet me.

To the traveller fresh from the West the Montenegrin costume of both
women and men is very attractive, but a few days in the Balkans soon
accustoms the eye to a perfect phantasmagoria of colour and of costume.
Pero was my driver’s name, and I noticed that around his waist was a
revolver belt, but minus the weapon. I inquired where it was, and with a
grin he informed me that Cattaro, being in Dalmatia, the Austrians would
not allow Montenegrins to bring arms into their country; so they were
compelled to leave them on the other side of the frontier, ten
kilometres distant.

My bags packed upon the three-horse travelling carriage and secured with
many strings, and Pero equipped with a plentiful stock of cigarettes, he
mounted upon the box, whipped up his long-tailed ponies, and we started
on our eight-hour ascent of that great wall of mountain that hides
Montenegro from the sea.

As we ascended through the little village of Skaljari we entered upon a
magnificent road, said to be one of the greatest engineering feats of
modern times, and steadily ascended, until at the striped
black-and-yellow Austrian boundary post we crossed the frontier, and
were in the “Land of the Black Mountain”—Montenegro. Across the road, at
an acute angle, a row of paving-stones marks the frontier, and soon
afterwards we found ourselves in the wildest and most desolate mountain
region. At a lonely roadside hut Pero obtained his big,
serviceable-looking revolver, and I, of course, wore mine in my belt;
for in Montenegro or Albania arms make the man. A man unarmed is looked
upon as an effeminate coward. Indeed, by order of Prince Nicholas every
Montenegrin must wear the national dress, both men and women, and every
man must carry his revolver when out of doors.

Four hours from Cattaro we were in a lonely mountain fastness, a wild,
desolate, treeless region of huge limestone rocks of peculiar volcanic
formation, which gave them the appearance of a boiling sea. The views
over the Adriatic as we turned back were so superb that, despite
photographing being strictly forbidden on account of the fortresses in
the vicinity, I could not resist the temptation to take one or two
surreptitiously. On, through a bleak, uninhabited country, we at last
reached the guard-house of Kerstac, and then half an hour later found
ourselves upon a plateau where, in the centre, stood the small clean
village of Nyegush, the ancestral home of the reigning family, and the
scene of most of the Montenegrin wars of independence. Here we halted
for half an hour at the post-house, and before we left, the big,
lumbering post-diligence, with its armed guard, came up behind us.

Before we moved off again it had grown dark, the moon shone, and for
four hours longer we alternately climbed and descended through that wild
region of silence and desolation, until at last we saw, deep below, the
lights of Cettinje, the little capital, and an hour later brought us to
the unpretending “Grand” Hotel.

Hardly had I entered my room when there came a loud knock at my door,
and a tall, scarlet-coated Montenegrin warrior, armed to the teeth,
entered and saluted. For a moment I looked up at him aghast, but the
mystery was solved when, next second, he handed me with great ceremony a
telegram from a dear friend in England wishing me Godspeed. I had taken
him to be, at least, one of the Prince’s bodyguard, and he was only a
plain telegraph messenger!

This was but one of many surprises in store for me in Montenegro. Next
morning I went out to look round the clean little capital, when, on
passing the Prince’s palace, I saw a number of soldiers drawn up, and as
I went by, the band suddenly struck up the British National Anthem! I
raised my hat, halted, and stood puzzled. Surely they were not honouring
me! Another moment, however, and I recognised the reason. In a carriage,
accompanied by the Grand Marechal of the Court, there drove up my friend
Mr. Charles des Graz, the newly-appointed British Chargé d’Affaires to
Montenegro, who was about to present his credentials to His Royal
Highness the Prince.

Montenegro is perhaps the most interesting country in all the Balkans.
Cettinje, a small, clean town of broad streets and one-storeyed,
whitewashed houses, is a little city in the sky, lying as it does in a
cup-shaped depression at the summit of a high, bare mountain. Its long,
straight, main street reminds one very much of a small country town in
England, if it were not that everyone is, by law, compelled to wear the
national dress, and every man has in his belt his big, long-barrelled
revolver, without which he must never go out of doors.

The men, sturdy mountaineers, are of fine physique—handsome fellows, all
of them. Their dress consists of dark blue baggy trousers, white woollen
gaiters, raw-hide shoes, a scarlet jacket heavily braided with gold, and
a small round cap, with black silk around the edge and the crown of the
same colour as the jacket, bearing the Prince’s initials in Servian
letters, “H.I.” The women, who are particularly good-looking, wear dark
skirts, beautifully hand-embroidered blouses, and a kind of long coat,
with open sleeves of soft, dove-grey cloth. Forbidden to wear European
hats, they are compelled to adopt an exactly similar cap to the men,
except that the crown is embroidered instead of bearing the royal
initials.

Nowhere have I seen such glorification of the male as in Montenegro. To
the men, born fighters as they are, work is undignified; therefore the
women toil while the opposite sex look on. I saw women employed in
building operations and performing work which, in other countries, is
left to day-labourers.

Cettinje is quaint in the extreme. The only houses of foreigners are the
various Legations, and the only foreigners are diplomats with their
wives and families. The first thing that strikes the stranger is the
number of petroleum tins. Opposite the hotel I saw a great ring of empty
tins, numbering some hundreds, ranged around a fountain. A few women
were squatting gossiping, and an armed policeman lounged against the
water-source. On inquiry, I found that there was a water famine, and the
tins had been placed there at dawn to await the moment when the
authorities thought fit to allow the people to get their daily supply.
The women had gone away to work, and would return later. The
Montenegrins a short time ago constructed a reservoir, but there was a
crack in it, so the water ran away. Hence the famine.

The petroleum tin is never out of sight for a single moment in Cettinje.
At any hour, and in any street, you see women and children carrying
them. They are used for everything, from milk-pails to flower-pots.

In Cettinje one comes for the first time up against the dark-faced,
scowling Albanian in his tightly fitting trousers of white wool striped
with black, his dirty white fez, and the swagger of superiority in his
gait. He is well armed, and for a good reason. The Montenegrin hates the
Albanian, because of the constant border feuds over at Podgoritza, where
blood is constantly spilt, and where I have seen a Montenegrin in the
market squatting over a basket of apples with a loaded rifle.

That morning I was chatting to a man in Montenegrin dress, of whom I had
bought some excellent cigarettes, manufactured by the Montenegro Tobacco
Monopoly—an Italian syndicate, by the way—and happened to mention that I
was on my way to Albania.

“Ah, gospodin!” he exclaimed, holding up both his hands, and glancing at
the revolver in my belt. “Take my advice. Don’t go into Albania or
Macedonia. You are not safe there from one moment to the other. For half
a word they’ll shoot you dead as easily as they drink a glass of wine.
No man’s life is worth a moment’s purchase there. I’m Albanian
myself—from Kroja—and I know.”

[Illustration: The Royal Palace: Cettinje.]

[Illustration: Principal Street of Cettinje.]

This was scarcely reassuring. I looked about me on every hand as I
strolled through Cettinje. All was so quiet, so orderly, so very
peaceful there, even though the big, burly mountaineers in the
gold-laced jackets eyed me with askance as I passed. Not without some
trepidation I took a number of photographs, for I had heard that, like
the Turk, the Montenegrin was averse to having his counterfeit
presentment put upon paper. Nevertheless, the first feeling of
insecurity having passed, I very soon found myself quite at home in
Cettinje, and in the midst of very good and kind friends.

A good many foreigners come up from Cattaro to pry about Cettinje for a
day or two, buy picture-postcards and antique arms, sneer at the honest
Montenegrin, and return into Dalmatia. Towards such, the Montenegrin is
not particularly polite. But those who go to Cettinje to seriously and
thoroughly study the people and their future will find a great deal of
genuine and charming hospitality.

My first day in Cettinje was lonely. Afterwards, until I left, I was
always with friends and officials, who took the greatest trouble to
answer my questions and explain matters.

Montenegro is entirely unlike any other country in the world. Its air of
antiquity is particularly pleasing, while on every hand the beneficent
rule of Prince Nicholas is apparent. Every man in Montenegro swears by
his Prince, whom he almost worships. They call him their “father,” and
if His Royal Highness raised the standard of war tomorrow, every man
would rise and fight to the death. The Prince is accessible to all his
people—more so to them, indeed, than to the diplomats. Sometimes, early
in the morning, he will sit in an arm-chair on the steps leading to the
entrance of his palace, and there hear the complaints or petitions of
his people. In this patriarchal way he often ministers justice. Last
year he granted Montenegro a Constitution, and there is now a Skupshtina
similar to that of Servia; but the people have not yet quite understood
that in future they must go to the Ministers, and not to their Prince.
They will see him, and nobody else.

In no country is loyalty and patriotism so strong as in Montenegro. The
army is well trained, and the whole country being one huge natural
fortress, a foreign enemy would experience enormous difficulty in
gaining entrance. In Cettinje, even a constant traveller like myself
meets with continual surprises. One day, while walking at the rear of
the Bigliardo, or old palace—so called because when built the first
billiard table was introduced—I heard the sound of clanking chains
behind me. At first I took no notice, but as it continued with regular
rhythm I glanced behind, when, to my amazement, I saw a convict in
leg-fetters with difficulty taking his afternoon stroll beneath the
trees! There were several others on the grass plot before the prison,
idling in the shadow or gossiping with their friends, who had come to
keep them company!

Inquiries showed that most of these prisoners were murderers, not for
robbery but for vendetta. In Montenegro the blood-feud is constant, and
life is held very cheap. It invariably commences by jealousy, and is of
everyday occurrence. Two lovers quarrel, and one is shot. Then the
blood-feud commences, and unlike in Italy or other Southern countries,
the vendetta is not only upon the murderer, but upon his next-of-kin.
Therefore, if the assassin escapes into Servia, Bosnia, or Turkey, as he
so often does, the brother of the dead man takes up the feud and kills
the assassin’s brother without parley when next he meets him. I myself
saw a man shot dead one night in Ryeka, at the head of the Lake of
Scutari, and the murderer walked coolly away undeterred. It was the
blood-feud, and no one took much notice.

“_S’bogom!_” (God be with you!) It is the expression you hear on every
hand in the Balkans. In the streets the peasants touch their round caps
in salute and exclaim, “_S’bogom!_” When you leave for a journey and
when you return, when you rise and when you go to rest; even if you go
for a short walk—it is the same. Life is so uncertain in those wild
regions that the protection of the Almighty is invoked upon you always,
and your revolver is ever ready in your belt.

In Cettinje I had a faithful guide and servant, a black-eyed, somewhat
sinister-looking Albanian, named Palok. He travelled with me through
Montenegro and Albania, and was most faithful and devoted. Besides
Albanian and Serb he spoke a little Italian, and possessed a keen sense
of humour.

One day, while we were travelling through the wild, bare mountain, a
perfect wilderness of huge boulders without a single tree or even blade
of grass, we halted for our midday meal, and while eating he told me of
a great friend of his who had recently been killed at Spuz for vendetta,
and he added, fondling the butt of his revolver, “I too, gospodin, shall
die before long.”

I looked at him in surprise. His usually humorous face had changed. It
was dark and thoughtful, and his black eyes were fixed upon me.

“Is there a blood-feud upon you, then?” I asked, in surprise.

“Yes,” he replied briefly; and though I endeavoured to persuade him to
tell the story, it was not until the following day that with some
reluctance he explained.

“A year ago my brother Tef, away in Scutari, fell in love with a
beautiful girl. He had a rival—a young Albanian, a coppersmith in
the bazaar. They quarrelled, but the girl—ah! she was very
beautiful—preferred Tef. Whereupon the rival one night took his
rifle and laid in wait for my brother in the main street of Scutari.
Early in the evening he left the house of the girl’s father, and as
he passed the fellow shot poor Tef dead.”

And he paused as his brow knit deeply, and his teeth were set tightly.

“Well?” I asked.

“Well, gospodin. What would you have done had your own brother died a
dog’s death? I took a rifle, and within a week the murderer was in his
grave. I shot him through the heart—and then I left Scutari.”

“And you are safe here, in Montenegro?”

“Safe! Oh dear, no,” he answered. “One day—it may be to-day—the fellow’s
brother will kill me. He must kill me. It is Fate—why worry about it? It
does one no good.”

And the marked man, the man doomed to die at a moment when he least
expects it, rolled a cigarette and lit it with perfect resignment.

“And are you not afraid to go with me back to Scutari?” I asked, amazed
at his fearlessness.

“Afraid, gospodin!” he exclaimed, looking at me in reproach as his hand
instinctively wandered to his weapon. “Afraid! No Albanian is afraid of
the blood-feud. I have killed the murderer, and his brother must kill
me. It is our law.” And the doomed man smiled gravely.

“And the girl?” I asked.

“Ah! They are all the same,” he answered, with a quick shrug of the
shoulders. “A month ago she married a tobacco-seller—a man old enough to
be her father. Poor Tef! If he could but know!”

“And the blood-feud still continues?”

“Of course—until I am dead.”

Then Palok smoked on in silence, entirely resigned to the fate that
awaits him. He knows that one day, as he walks along the road, the sharp
crack of a hidden rifle will sound, and he will fall to earth, another
victim of a woman’s fickleness.

_S’bogom!_—God be with you!

[Illustration: HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE NICHOLAS OF MONTENEGRO.]




                               CHAPTER II
                     AN AUDIENCE OF PRINCE NICHOLAS

The Palace at Cettinje—A cigarette with the Prince—The policy of
    Montenegro—A confidential chat—His Royal Highness’s admiration for
    England—His views upon Macedonia—He urges me not to attempt to go to
    Albania, but I persuade him to help me—His Highness’s
    kindness—Souvenirs.


“His Royal Highness the Prince will be pleased to grant you private
audience at four o’clock this afternoon, gospodin.”

The tall, burly aide-de-camp in the little round cap, high boots, pale
blue overcoat, and pistols in his belt, saluted, and we shook hands.

It was then three o’clock, and I was just about to go out to visit
Madame Constantinovitch, the mother of Princess Mirko. So I had to
return at once to my room and dress for the audience. The kings and
princes of the Balkans have a habit of summoning one at a moment’s
notice, and paying visits at unearthly hours.

Here, in Cettinje, in the heart of these wild, desolate fastnesses, one
seems so far removed from European influence, yet how great a part has
this rocky, impregnable country, with its fierce soldier-inhabitants,
played in the politics of Eastern Europe, and how great a part it is
still destined to play in the near future!

The fact that everybody is armed gives the stranger an uncanny feeling.
The man who brings one’s coffee wears a perfect arsenal of weapons in
his sash, and one quickly acquires the habit of carrying a revolver
one’s self. Indeed, if you are wise, you will carry a good serviceable
weapon from the moment you enter the Balkans to the moment you quit
them. But if you approach the Albanian frontier, you will be at once
warned not to fire without just cause. A few shots is sufficient to
alarm the whole neighbourhood for many miles, and on hearing the alarm
every man seizes his rifle and flies to the rendezvous, fully equipped
and eager for the fight with those Albanian border tribes, of whom I
afterwards had the good fortune to be the guest.

I had already had a long chat with Prince Danilo, the Crown Prince of
Montenegro, whom I found a very smart and highly educated man, fully
alive to the political difficulties of the neighbouring states and the
necessity of Montenegro preserving her independence. He held very strong
views upon the terrible state of affairs in Macedonia, and gave me many
interesting details about his own country.

Having met him, and also his younger brother, Prince Mirko, I was
particularly anxious to make the acquaintance of their father, Prince
Nicholas, the ruler of the sturdy, warlike dwellers of the “Land of the
Black Mountain”—the principal and most striking figure in this
remarkable country, where peace and war walk ever hand-in-hand.

Since 1860, when his uncle, Prince Danilo, was assassinated, he has
ruled justly, if somewhat sternly, and has succeeded in raising his
nation from a state of semi-civilisation to the high place it now
occupies in the Eastern world. In 1888 he gave the country a Civil and
Criminal Code, and last year he granted a Constitution. Indeed, he has
done all in his power to induce his warriors to follow the arts of peace
without forgetting those of war.

At the hour appointed, the royal aide-de-camp called in a carriage and
drove me to the Palace,—a long, dark brown building of somewhat plain
exterior, as befits the home of a fighting race,—where I was received in
the great hall by half a dozen bowing servants in scarlet and gold. Here
I was met by the chamberlain, who conducted me up the grand staircase
and into the great audience-chamber, with its many fine paintings and
highly polished floor. Then, after a moment, the Prince—a brilliant
figure—entered, shook me by the hand, and welcomed me to Montenegro.

These formalities ended, His Royal Highness said in Italian, “Come, let
us go into yonder room. We shall be able to talk there more
comfortably.” And he led me into a smaller chamber, where he gave me a
seat at the table where he sat.

The afternoon was gloomy, and dusk was creeping on, therefore upon the
table a great antique silver candelabra had been set, and by its light I
was enabled to obtain a good view of the ruler of Crnagora, the “Land of
the Black Mountain.”

Of magnificent physique, tall, muscular, with hair slightly grey, he
bore his sixty-five years lightly. Attired in the splendid national
costume of scarlet, blue, and gold, with high boots, he wore a single
decoration at his throat, the Cross of Danilo, of which Order he is
Master. Upon his handsome, well-cut features the candles shed a soft
light, causing the gold upon his dress to glitter, and I noticed, as I
asked him questions, how his dark, keen eyes shot quick, inquiring
glances of alertness.

After the first few minutes of regal formality His Highness’s manner
entirely changed. Putting ceremony aside, he produced his cigarette
case—of crocodile skin, with the royal crown and cipher in gold in the
corner—offered me a Montenegrin cigarette, took one himself, lit mine
with his own hand, and then we fell to chatting.

In the delightful hour and a half we smoked together I asked the
prince-poet many questions, and learnt many things. He explained several
difficult points in Balkan politics, which to me, an Englishman, had
always been puzzling. We spoke—in Italian—of Macedonia and of a certain
well-known foreign diplomat in London who was our mutual friend, the
Prince giving me a very kind message to deliver to him.

Presently I referred to the splendid result of his rule, and related to
him a little incident which had occurred to me in Nyegush a few days
before, as showing how deeply he was beloved by his nation. A smile
crossed his fine open countenance as he replied simply, “I have done my
best for my people—my very best; and I shall do so as long as God gives
me life. I am happy to believe that my people appreciate my efforts.”

“And now, Monseigneur,” I asked, “will you tell me what is the present
position of Montenegro?”

“The present position is peace,” was his prompt answer. “I have granted
a Constitution, and the first meeting of the new Skupshtina has been
held successfully. Though the Albanian question is always with us, I am
thankful to say we are on the most excellent terms with Turkey, while
towards Russia we are pursuing our traditional policy. For the Emperor
Francis Josef of Austria I have nothing but the most profound
admiration, and I owe very much to him.”

“And towards England, Monseigneur?”

“England has been, as you know, Montenegro’s very best friend,” replied
the Prince. “I, personally, have the greatest respect and admiration for
your great country. We Montenegrins always remember that it was Mr.
Gladstone who gave us the strip of seaboard on the Adriatic with
Dulcigno. He was our greatest friend, and his memory is respected by
every man in Montenegro. Of Tennyson, too, I am a great admirer. I am
very fond of his poems.”

“You are a poet yourself, Monseigneur,” I remarked, remembering that
more than one poetical drama from his pen had been successfully produced
on the stage.

His Royal Highness smiled, and puffed slowly at his cigarette.

“I have written one or two little things, it is true; but nothing of
late.”

“I wonder if I dare ask your Royal Highness to write a few lines for me
as a souvenir of my visit?” I asked, not without some trepidation.

“Ah!—well—I won’t promise,” he laughed. “All depends whether I’m in the
mood for it.”

“But you will try, won’t you?”

And the Prince nodded assent.

Then we spoke of Servia and of recent events there; but he was not
inclined to discuss the question, and naturally so, when it is
remembered that his daughter was the late wife of King Peter.

[Illustration: The Petroleum tins of Cettinje.]

[Illustration: The Monastery: Cettinje.]

Returning to the burning question of Macedonia, I saw that he was well
informed of all that was transpiring around lakes Presba and Ochrida and
down in Serres.

“It is a monstrous state of affairs,” he declared. “Something must be
done at once, for as soon as spring comes again the massacres will
increase.”

“But there are outrages, tortures, and massacres every day,” I remarked.

“Ah yes,” he sighed, “I know. Most terrible details have reached me
lately. But you are going to Macedonia yourself, and you will see with
your own eyes.”

“And what, in your opinion, would be the best settlement of the
question?” I inquired.

“There is but one way, namely, for the Powers to call a conference and
place Macedonia under a governor-general, who must be a European prince.
The reforms would then be carried out, and the Greek bands expelled from
the country. How long will Europe tolerate the present frightful state
of affairs?”

“The fact is, Monseigneur, that we, in England, are very ignorant of the
true state of things, or even of the facts of the Macedonian question,”
I said.

“Ah, there you are quite correct. If your English public knew what was
really happening—how an innocent Christian population is being
slaughtered and exterminated because of international rivalry—they would
cry shame upon those responsible for this wholesale murder and outrage.
But”—he smiled—“I almost forget myself. My position as a ruler forbids
me to talk politics, you know!”

And we laughed together.

“So you are going to Servia, Bulgaria, Roumania, and to
Constantinople—eh?” he remarked a little later, when we had lit fresh
cigarettes. “In Bulgaria, and also in Roumania, you will see many things
that will interest you. The Bulgarians are very strongly armed, and so
are the Roumanians.”

“Her Majesty the Queen of Roumania has also promised me audience,” I
said.

“When you see her, will you please present to Her Majesty my most
cordial respects. She is so very charming.”

“I want, Monseigneur, to visit Northern Albania, leaving Montenegro by
Ryeka and Scutari. Would that be the best route, do you think?”

“What!” he exclaimed, in surprise. “Do you actually contemplate visiting
the tribes up in the Accursed Mountains?”

“Certainly. Why not?”

“Well, my advice is, don’t think of going there. If you do, you will
never return. You’ll be shot at sight, like a dog. You have no idea what
those uncivilised tribes are like. The whole country is utterly
lawless.”

“So I understand. But I’ve also heard that the Albanian possesses a deep
sense of honour. And I thought that I might possibly obtain permission
from one or other of the chiefs.”

The Prince was silent for a moment. Then, looking at me across the
table, said—

“Do not go. It is far too great a risk.”

His advice was the same that my friends in London had given me; the same
that I had received there, in the marketplace of Cettinje.

But I was determined, and pressed His Royal Highness to assist me, at
last receiving his promise of help. By his kind permission, the Albanian
named Palok acted as my guide, and what eventually happened to me in
that wild region will be seen in the following pages.

“Well,” exclaimed the Prince at last,“if you go up there, it must be at
your own risk. I’ve warned you of the danger. No one has been up there
for many years. It has been attempted, of course, but travellers have
either been held to ransom, and the Turks have been compelled to pay for
their release, or else they have simply been shot by the first Albanian
meeting them. The country beyond Scutari is the most unsafe in the whole
Balkan Peninsula.”

[Illustration:

  Mr. CHAS. DES GRAZ,
  British Chargé d’Affaires at Cettinje.
]

[Illustration: The Piazza: Ragusa.]

I replied that I intended to make the attempt.

“Well, then, I wish you _buon viaggio_,” he laughed. “May every good
luck attend you, and—as we say in Montenegro—_S’bogom!_ (God be with
you!) When you return—for I suppose you will pass this way down to the
sea—come and see me, and tell me all about the Skreli and Kastrati
country—for of course I am highly interested. They are always at war
with our people on the frontier.”

“I will let your Royal Highness know the moment I am back in Cettinje,”
I promised.

Then rising, he gripped my hand warmly, saying—

“Then I will help you if I can. Be careful of yourself, for I shall be
anxious about you. Again, _S’bogom!_”

And the Prince accompanied me to the head of the grand staircase, where
I made my obeisance, turned and descended through the rows of armed and
bowing servants ranged in the hall, charmed by His Royal Highness’s
graciousness towards me and by the pleasant chat I had enjoyed.

When, after my journey through Northern Albania, I one afternoon
re-entered that audience-chamber, and he came forward with outstretched
hand to greet me, he exclaimed—

“Well, well! I am so glad to see you back safe and sound. You look a
little thinner in the face—a little travel-worn—eh? Life in the Albanian
mountains is not like your life in London or Paris, is it? But never
mind as long as you are safe,” he laughed, placing his hand kindly upon
my shoulder. “Come along to this room. It is more cosy,” and he led me
to the smaller apartment, his own private cabinet.

For nearly two hours I sat relating to him what occurred on my journey,
and describing the wild country which had, until then, been practically
a sealed book. Even though Cettinje is so near, hardly anything was
known of the Skreli, the Hoti, the Klementi, or the Kastrati tribes,
save that they were brigandish bands who constantly raided the
Montenegrin frontier.

The Prince listened to me with great attention, and put many questions
to me as we smoked together.

Then rising, he took from a drawer in his great writing-table a small
scarlet box, and as he opened it he bestowed upon me a compliment
undeserved, for he said—

“There are few men who would have risked what you have done. Therefore I
wish to invest you with our Order of Danilo, as a mark of my
appreciation and esteem.”

And he displayed to me the beautiful dark blue and white enamelled cross
of the Order, the same that he was wearing at his throat, surmounted by
the royal crown and suspended upon the white ribbon edged with cerise.

After he had invested me with the Order, saying many kind things to me,
which I really don’t think I deserved, he added—

“The _chef du chancellerie_ will send you the diploma in due course, and
I trust, when you petition your own gracious Sovereign King Edward, that
His Majesty will allow you to wear this insignia.”

I thanked His Royal Highness, gripped his hand, and a few minutes later
passed through the line of bowing servants out of the Palace.

And that same evening I received from His Royal Highness the signed
photograph which appears in these pages.

Before I left Cettinje I received the following expressive lines,
written especially for me by a Montenegrin poet who is a great
personage, but whose name he would not permit me to give. They are in
Servian as follows, and I have placed their English translation below:—

                     S’ veledušnog Albiona
                     Pružiše se dvije ruke
                     Crnoj Gori da pomogu
                     U junačke njene muke

                         S’ vrućom rječu na ustima
                         Gladston diže Crnogorce
                         A Tenison za najprve
                         U svijet ih broi borce

                     Na glas svoih Velikana
                     Britanski se narod trže
                     Da pomože da zaštiti
                     Crnu Goru iz najbrže

                         Posla svoje bojne ladje
                         Što na tečnost gospostvuju
                         Veledušno da zaštite
                         Domovinu milu Moju

                     O fala ti po sto puta
                     Blagorodni lyudi Soju
                     Dok je svjeta dok je greda
                     Nad Ulcinjem koje stoju

                         Hraniće ti blagodarnost
                         Ova šaka sokolova
                         Koima si u pomoci
                         Stiga putem od valova.

The literal translation in English is as follows:—

             From the great-souled Albion,
             Two arms were stretched
             To help Montenegro
             In her heroic sufferings.

             With fiery word on his lips
             Gladstone lifts up Montenegrins,
             Whilst Tennyson declared them
             The very first fighters in the world.

             On the call of their great men,
             British people rose up
             In quickest manner, to help
             And to protect Montenegro.

             They despatched their war-ships,
             Which rule over the seas,
             Generously to protect
             My Fatherland so dear to me.

             Oh! thanks to thee, hundredfold thanks,
             Noble race of men.
             As long as the world lasts,
             As long as the mountains above Dulcigno stand,

             Will remain grateful to thee,
             This handful of falcons,
             To whose help thou didst come
             By the road of the waves.




                            NORTHERN ALBANIA




                               CHAPTER I
                          INTO A SAVAGE REGION

Wildest Albania—Warnings not to attempt to travel there—I decide to go,
    and take Palok—Prince Nicholas of Montenegro bids us farewell—On the
    Lake of Scutari—Arrival at Skodra—Passports, rabble, and
    backsheesh—Photographing the fortress in secret—Treading dangerous
    ground—Albania the Unknown.


Before leaving London various insurance companies had flatly declined to
accept the risk of “accident,” because it was known that I intended
visiting Albania.

Indeed, no company in the City would insure me, and at Lloyd’s the
premium quoted was exorbitant. This was the reverse of reassuring.
Northern Albania I knew to be the wildest and most savage country in the
East, and the Accursed Mountains, which I wanted to visit, were held by
brigandish tribes, who shot the traveller at sight or held him to
ransom. So little is known about them that they had always held a
peculiar fascination for me.

I searched through the journals of the Royal Geographical Society for
many years past, but found little mention of Northern Albania, while of
books of actual travel in that region there were none. These facts had
decided me to accept the risks, whatever these might be, and go into
those wild, inaccessible mountains which bear the name of Accursed.

Everybody warned me of danger. Friends in England constantly urged me to
“take care of myself,” as though that were possible when in the midst of
a hostile tribe; and in fact there seemed to be a conspiracy on the part
of friends, strangers, and officials to prevent me penetrating the Land
of Mystery.

When I mentioned my intention in Cettinje, everyone, as I have already
said, held up their hands and raised their eyes. It was sheer madness,
they declared. Nobody’s life was worth a moment’s purchase outside the
town of Skodra—or Scutari, as it appears on our maps. Outside—beyond
Turkish control—well, I should not be allowed to travel a couple of
miles before I had a bullet through me from behind a rock at the
roadside.

Everybody had some weird or horrible story to tell about the savagery of
the Hoti, the Kastrati, the Skreli, and other savage tribes inhabiting
those high, misty mountains beyond the Montenegro border. The one or two
Albanians—tall, muscular fellows in white felt skullcap, tight white
woollen trousers heavily braided with black, and a kind of black bolero
with long fringe—whom I had seen in Montenegro were certainly a
sinister-looking, forbidding lot. But I had come to the Balkans to
investigate and to learn the truth; therefore the more I was urged not
to attempt to go into the mountains, the firmer was my determination to
do so.

His Royal Highness, Prince Nicholas himself, had at one of the audiences
he granted me seriously queried the advisability of undertaking the
journey. Almost daily on the Albanian frontier were raids into
Montenegrin territory, and the whole border was constantly terrorised by
the Albanian bands, who shot the Montenegrins wherever found. Indeed,
the market at Podgoritza, where men squatted with loaded rifles over
four or five fowls or a basket of apples, was sufficient to tell me the
truth; while the daily talk of that town was of fighting with the wild
race who live across the border. The Montenegrin hates the Albanian, and
has surely good cause to do so. Many a comely Montenegrin maiden—and
some of them are exceedingly beautiful—has been captured in those night
raids and carried across into Turkish territory, to be heard of no more.
And many, too, are the reprisals by the Montenegrins; mostly, however,
with serious losses to themselves.

[Illustration: Ryeka, Montenegro.125]

[Illustration: Zabliak, Montenegro.]

Palok, whom I had engaged as my guide, had, he said, been born in
Skodra, or, as we call it, Scutari, which causes it to be confounded
with the city on the Bosphorus. He also declared that he was well known
there, and the fact that he also spoke Italian caused me to accept his
services.

When I asked Fevzi Pasha, the Turkish Minister in Cettinje, for a
passport for Skodra, or “Scutari d’Albanie,” as it appears on the
_visa_, he granted it, but not without words of caution. “In Scutari you
will have nothing to fear,” he said. “I will give you a note to the
Governor of the town. But do not go into the country. If you do, you’ll
be shot like a dog.”

I thanked him, but had no intention of taking his well-meant advice.

At half-past three one dark morning I took Palok, and we drove out on
the road that wound high up across the great lonely mountains to the
little town of Ryeka, whence a small steamer plies down the Lake of
Scutari to Skodra. The drive was cold and weary, through a barren waste
of rocks, but the bright autumn sun was up ere we reached Ryeka, and
just as I boarded the big canoe with long, upturned, pointed prow, which
takes passengers and baggage down the sluggish stream to the boat at the
entrance to the lake, I saw, on the road above, a fine military figure
in pale blue, riding a splendid white charger and followed by an
officer.

In a moment every head was bared. It was Prince Nicholas, who was
staying at his palace at Ryeka, taking his morning ride.

He espied me, pulled up, and shouted down in Italian—

“Hulloa! Good-morning! Then you are off to Albania after all, eh?”

“Yes, Monseigneur,” I responded.

“Did you get my message last night?” he inquired, referring to a
confidential matter.

“Thank you, Monseigneur, yes.”

“Very well. Only be careful of yourself, you know, and when you get
back, come and tell me all about it.” And, laughing, His Royal Highness
waved his hand with a merry “Bon voyage!” and cantered away, while my
half a dozen fellow-travellers in gold-braided costumes regarded me in
wonder that their Prince should stop and converse with me—a perfect
stranger.

Down the silent river, between steep green hills we glided. Choked by
the tangle and rot of weeds, it was the haunt of thousands of waterfowl,
and, as we passed, the herons rose with a lazy flapping of wings,—a
stream that might well be haunted by the fairies, for the water was
unruffled and the silence deep and complete.

Boarding the little steamer, the _Nettuno_, lying at the mouth of the
river, we were soon out in the great green lake, with the high mountains
looming grey in the far distance. As we steamed due south, the barren
mountains of Montenegro were soon left behind. At Virpasar and Plavnitza
we picked up passengers, a fat Turkish peasant woman carrying two
baskets of fowls, and three young Montenegrins, fully armed with rifles
and revolvers. Because she was not yet in Turkey, the woman wore no
veil; yet in the evening, as soon as Skodra came in sight, she produced
her veil, and carefully adjusted it, laughing with me the whole time,
and wound it until only her bright dark eyes were visible.

From Virpasar an Italian company is now building a railway to the
Montenegrin port of Antivari, so that in a couple of years the lake will
be connected with the Adriatic, and form the much-needed trade route for
Montenegro. The Servians, indeed, are hoping also to use Antivari as
their Adriatic port, and thus be free of the excessive Customs dues and
other oppression placed upon them by Austria-Hungary. When in Belgrade,
M. Stoyanovitch, the Servian Minister of Commerce, explained to me the
several schemes for the construction of a railroad from Krushevatz, in
Servia, by way of Novi-Bazar, Ipek, Podgoritza, and Ryeka, to join the
Italian line at Virpasar, and so to the Adriatic or to San Giovanni di
Medua. Servia must secure a port, and this line, whenever made, will be
a most paying concern, for by its extension from Stalacs—on the main
Belgrade-Sofia line—to Orsova, it would receive most of the exports of
Southern Russia to Western Europe.

[Illustration: PALOK, my companion through the Skreli country.]

The mere handful of lake-side dwellings which now constitutes Virpasar
will, ere many years have passed, grow into an important trade centre,
and upon the great silent lake, surrounded by those high sheer mountains
where the eagle and the pelican are now the only signs of life, big
passenger and freight steamers will soon ply. The railway, which must be
built ere long, will quickly bring a civilising influence upon Northern
Albania; therefore, if one wishes to see it in all its wildness, it must
be seen to-day. In another decade the Albanian brigand—the real thing
out of the story-book—will be only a matter of history.

The calm, bright day was perfect. The surface of the great lake was like
a mirror, and the fringe of giant mountain constantly changed in
colour—grey, blue, purple, and rose—as the hours wore on, and the sun
sank westward in all the crimson glory of the death of the autumn day.

Now and then, with our rifles, we took pot-shots at the pelicans, but
with little result. A young Montenegrin killed one, and the huge bird
came down with a great splash into the water. At last, in the falling
twilight, we cast anchor at the head of the Boyana River, which empties
itself into the lake, and then, boarding another high-prowed canoe,
where a Turkish soldier sat over us with a loaded rifle, we were rowed
slowly up to the low line of ramshackle buildings, which was our first
sight of Skodra.

With our farewell to the _Nettuno_ we had said good-bye to civilisation,
as represented by sturdy Montenegro. We were in Albania, the wildest and
most turbulent country in the East.

We landed upon some slimy steps amid a perfect babel of shouts. Hundreds
of unwashed Turks and Albanians were awaiting us, all shouting in a
language of which I understood not one word. Every man, armed and of
ferocious aspect, seemed ready to make short work of both Palok and
myself. Indeed, so unpleasant is the landing at Skodra, that Palok
himself had already sent a message to a friend of his—a typical brigand
of the first water—to give the Customs officer a tip, and so make
pleasant our path through that dark, evil-smelling hole where the Turks
collect their dues. Palok’s friend, whom I only saw on that one
occasion, and whose name I could not ascertain, had managed to secure
from somewhere a mustard-coloured ramshackle fly, the upholstering of
which was in ribbons. The driver, in his white fez, with dirty white
baggy trousers and yellow tunic, came forward and saluted me with deep
obeisance, while I was explaining to the passport officer—a ragged,
consumptive youth—that my name was not “We, Sir Edward Grey.”

The chief of the Customs was a long, very thin, white-fezzed Turk with
large silver-mounted pistols in his belt, very tight white trousers, a
gold-embroidered jacket, and pointed slippers that turned up at the toes
in the most approved style. He was a real live Bey, so Palok told me,
but he was not averse to receiving tenpence as a tip. Later, when I left
Scutari (or Skodra) again, I gave him ten Austrian crowns, for I had in
my bag a couple of thousand cigarettes, which, by Turkish law, are
prohibited from leaving the country. His charge for winking at the
contravention is five crowns a thousand!

Turkish Custom Houses are weird places, and it is no wonder that the
British Ambassador at Constantinople is just now pressing for some
reform. Your belongings are not only thoroughly examined and heavily
assessed for Customs—if you won’t tip—when you enter Turkish territory,
but the same happens when you leave. Woe-betide those who dispense with
the services of a discreet dragoman and do not tip. All that you may
have bought in Turkey will be found liable to duty. Gold embroideries
will be weighed, and anything that has the Sultan’s monogram upon it—as
so many embroideries have—will be at once confiscated.

The man in the fez is grave and inexorable. His attitude is as though he
would scorn the offer of a bribe and throw you into prison for daring to
insult an official of His Imperial Majesty. Yet outside the Custom House
he keeps a crafty ragamuffin who is ready to accept a four-franc piece
on his behalf, and for that he will pass a thousand pounds’ worth of
goods with only a pretence of search! The Custom House at Galata on the
Bosphorus is a case in point. There are five officials there who share
the spoils from the traveller.

Yes, the land of the Crescent is indeed a quaint country. The corruption
of Turkish Customs officials is no doubt due to the frequent non-payment
of their stipends. They must live, and do so by accepting bribes. I
afterwards spoke to certain high government officials at Constantinople
about it, and they admitted that they knew bribery existed extensively,
but at present were utterly unable to suppress it.

Over the ramshackle Custom House, a dark hole without a window, frowns a
shattered fortress containing one or two antiquated guns, a photograph
of which I afterwards obtained surreptitiously, and which appears in
these pages. Had I been discovered, I might have spent an unpleasant
year or so in a Turkish prison. But even that offence, so heinous in
Germany, France, or Austria, I suppose I could easily have expiated with
a few piastres of backsheesh. In Turkey you can do anything—if you are
prepared to pay.

Upon that filthy crowd around the Custom House at Skodra, upon those
crumbling buildings, upon that old white fortress, upon the tower of
Skodra itself, a mile away, the centuries of progress have made no
impression. Here is the country of a mediæval people, the life of an age
long ago past and forgotten.

While our fellow-travellers were squabbling, arguing, shouting, and
cursing the wild, dirty mob who now filled the Custom House, we, with
our baggage—canvas bags, specially made to sling on mules for mountain
travelling—ascended into the mustard-coloured conveyance and were driven
along a country lane, very English in its appearance, with bramble
hedgerows and ditches; yet the high, thin minaret of a mosque before us,
and the carefully latticed windows of a house, preventing the women-folk
from being seen from the roadway, and giving the place an air of
mystery, showed us to be in the land of His Majesty the Sultan—in
Albania the Unknown.




                               CHAPTER II
                          WHERE LIFE IS CHEAP

Fired at in the street of Skodra—My comfortless inn—Panorama of
    life—Armed bands of wild mountaineers in the streets—The Sign of the
    Cross—Scutarine people—The fascination of Skodra—In the den of my
    friend Salko—Making purchases—Short shrift with swindlers—Some
    genuine antiques—Ragged and shoeless soldiers of the Sultan—Men shot
    in the blood-feud—“It is nothing!”


I had not been in Skodra half an hour before a man fired at me with his
revolver.

It was my welcome to Albania, and I confess that I drew my own weapon
from my belt, prepared to defend myself.

I had arrived at the _han_, or inn, a poor place dignified by the name
of Hôtel de l’Europe, washed, and descended to the street, when, on
emerging from the doorway, somebody fired his pistol right in my face.
The flash startled me, and in an instant I was on my guard with my back
to the wall. In that brief second all that I had heard of the insecurity
of Albania flashed back.

My assailant—a tall, ragged-looking, middle-aged Turk in a scarlet
fez—laughed in my face and uttered some words that I did not understand.
He saw my weapon shining in the dim light, and pushed it away with a
laugh. His manner struck me as friendly, so I dropped my arm; whereupon
another man, in passing, also fired, then another and another, until,
ten seconds later, everybody in the street was firing indiscriminately,
and bullets were flying in all directions.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: In Skodra.]

I held my breath. Had the place actually revolted against the Turk just
at the moment of my arrival? If so, I was in luck’s way. I knew that the
Albanian hated the Turk, for Palok had told me that the revolution was
only a question of time, and that one day his people would drive them
out of Skodra. The place was once Servian, and captured by the Turks in
1479. Yet the Albanian still looks upon the Turk as a miserable
intruder, and intends one day, ere long, to drive him out.

Around me, on every hand, pistols were being fired, the flashes showing
red in the night, and I stood breathless, wondering what was happening.
The man who had fired in my face was grinning at my alarm, when Palok
dashed out to me.

“Signore! Signore!” he cried, in Italian. “It is nothing! Don’t be
alarmed. It is only the vigil of the fast of Ramadan. It is our way of
celebrating it!”

By that time every man in the whole town was firing off his revolver.
The din was deafening.

“Very well,” I laughed. “Then I’ll celebrate it too,” and, raising my
arm, I also emptied my weapon in the air.

The grinning Turk who had first fired and alarmed me saluted me by
touching chin and forehead, and then we laughed together. It was
certainly fortunate for him and for myself that I had not let fly, but
he did not seem to heed at all the danger of firing suddenly upon a
foreigner ignorant of what was about to happen.

The _han_, with the dignified name of “hotel,” was certainly an
uncomfortable place. Cold roast pork, a trifle “high,” was all I could
get to eat, and this was washed down by a light red vinegar, which was
probably at one time wine. For five days running I had that very same
pork served twice a day, until I sent Palok into the bazaar to buy me
other supplies. A narrow camp bed, an iron washstand with tin fittings,
a pail and a deal table, comprised my furniture, the best accommodation
that Skodra could afford.

Yet the town is perhaps one of the most interesting in all the Balkans,
and its people the most strangely mixed and wearing a greater variety of
Eastern costume than even in Constantinople itself.

The bazaar, down by the river, is full of quaint types and most
interesting. Its uneven pavement is quite as unclean and slippery with
the dirt of ages as are the streets of Constantinople, but its dark
little sheds are filled by workers, silver and copper smiths,
embroiderers, armourers, weavers, jewellers—in fact, one sees every
trade being carried on in the same primitive way and with the same tools
as in the Middle Ages.

Skodra is not a town of progress, for there telephone or electric light
is forbidden; machinery of every kind is against the law, and neither
newspapers nor books are allowed to enter Albania. Therefore in those
crooked streets of the bazaar the traveller is back in mediæval days,
and the town of to-day is just as Florence was in the days of Boccaccio
or Dante. Like the mediæval Florentines, many of the men from the
mountains shave their heads, leaving a tuft of bushy hair at the back,
which is cut square at the neck. With their tight-fitting
black-and-white striped trousers, black woollen boleros, their belts
filled with cartridges, and a rifle over their shoulders, they are a
fine, manly race, with swaggering gait, clean-cut features—mostly
Catholics, who spit openly at the lean, ragged, ill-fed soldiers of the
Sultan.

They come down from the mountains in armed bands, and walk through the
town, a dozen or so together, in complete defiance of the Turk. With men
upon whose heads a price has been set—known brigands or murderers,
indeed—I have chatted and drunk coffee in the bazaar, all wild fellows
who know no law except their own, and who do not acknowledge the Turk as
their ruler. When I inquired of Palok the reason of their immunity from
arrest, he replied—

“Why, signore, if the Turks captured one of these, the whole of Northern
Albania would rise as one man. The tribes would sweep down from the
mountains and sack and burn Skodra within twenty-four hours. Life in
this town is very uncertain, I can tell you. One never knows when the
rising will take place. All is ripe for it, and when it comes, then
woe-betide the Turk and all the Moslems. Have you not noticed the Sign
of the Cross over the doors of the Christians? Is that not significant?”

The Albanian tribesmen are mostly Catholics, together with some
Orthodox; yet they combine religion strangely with war. They go to the
Catholic Cathedral in Skodra with loaded rifles, which they place before
them as they kneel and pray, and before murdering their enemy they will
go and ask Providence to assist them.

The town Christian of Skodra is, for the most part, a very excellent
fellow. Palok, whom I found was well known, introduced me to many of
them, and in that wild land I received very many charming kindnesses
from perfect strangers.

The costume of the Scutarine men is distinctly quaint and curious. A
short dark red jacket, the front and sleeves of which are so completely
braided with narrow black braid as to almost hide the foundation, and
edged with dozens of oblong brass buttons; a pair of wide, dark blue
baggy breeches reaching to the knee; a round flat fez with a huge blue
silk tassel that falls about the shoulders; a bright, striped silk sash;
their legs in white cotton stockings and feet in patent leather
dress-shoes. Such is the dress of the average Christian one meets in
Skodra.

The attire of the women is even more extraordinary. They veil, just as
do the Mohammedan women, and only uncover their faces when they go to
church. For the most part they are beautiful when young, with clear,
delicate complexions, handsome features, and dancing black eyes; but
after seventeen appear to soon lose their beauty and become prematurely
wrinkled and old. The outdoor dress is generally made of the same dark
red cloth as the men’s jackets, so completely embroidered as to appear
black. Indeed no Scutarine, either man or woman, goes out in a dress
unless it is covered with embroidery. In every street you will see a
dozen men squatting cross-legged in a little dark shop, busily plying
the needle upon the narrow black braid, and applying tiny pieces of
green cloth among the braid as additional ornament. Often the braiding
is a marvel of needlework and design, and some of the outdoor costumes
of the women, though exceedingly ugly, are ornamented in such a manner
as to amaze the Western eye.

Female outdoor attire is, of course, of the divided skirt order,
trousers of thick braided cloth so clumsy that the wearer can only walk
with difficulty, a long cape, richly embroidered on the shoulders and
reaching to the hips, with a square kind of sailor collar that is raised
and pinned to the crown of the head. From the bridge of the nose to the
knee falls the white veil, like the Moslem women, while from the sash
are pinned gaily coloured silk handkerchiefs, which, appearing below the
cape, lend additional colour to the most unwieldy and ugly of all the
dresses of the East. The wearer cannot walk, but can only waddle with
difficulty.

The streets of Skodra are, however, a perfect panorama of costume. In
the dark entries the shuffling Mohammedan women, white-clothed from head
to foot and veiled, look ghostly and mysterious; the Mohammedan
unmarried girls with the striped red-and-white veil wrapped about them;
Albanians from the south in short, stiff cotton skirts like exaggerated
kilts; Turks in greasy frock-coats and discoloured fezes, strolling
slowly, fingering their beads to pass the time through Ramadan; fierce
tribesmen from the mountains in all sorts of different costumes, fully
armed and ready to shoot in an instant at discovering an enemy even
there in the crowded bazaar; unveiled country women in short, coarse,
black homespun skirts, wearing great iron-studded belts and savage
ornaments in brass, copper, and gold; giggling girls from the mountains
four or five days distant, dressed in their gorgeous gala dresses,
laughing as they bargain with the voluble keepers of the tiny shops in
the bazaar.

Skodra fascinates one. There is no European influence here: not a soul
is in European dress. It is the unchanging East—the same life that has
existed here for centuries. The Turks are, however, fanatics, and Palok
will not allow me to smoke a cigarette in the street in the daytime, for
in the fast of Ramadan the Mohammedans abstain from all food, drink, and
tobacco from four in the morning till the gun fires on the fortress at
sunset.

Upon Palok’s advice I even wore a fez, so as not to be too conspicuous.

When I asked the reason, he simply grinned, shrugged his shoulders, and
said—

“The signore believes Skodra to be a safe place. But it is not always
so. Why run unnecessary risk? And a fez is very comfortable.”

So after buying a fez, I took it to the ironer, a white-bearded old
Turk, who pressed it and shrunk it and combed out its tassel with great
ceremony, and then I assumed the distinctive mark of the Sultan’s
subjects, evidently to the great relief of the faithful Palok.

On our first visit to the bazaar Palok discovered a friend. He was a
very tall, thin-legged Albanian, in a white fez, a white woollen bolero,
and the usual black-and-white woollen trousers and turned-up shoes of
raw-hide and interlaced string. In one of the narrow, tortuous ways of
the bazaar, on a kind of platform before a small ramshackle booth, where
rope and twine were displayed, he was squatting cross-legged, staring
into space and awaiting customers.

Suddenly espying Palok, he seized his slippers, which stood near him,
and sprang out upon the filthy pavement. Next second the pair were
clasped in embrace, and after many mutual words of warm welcome in
Albanian, I was introduced.

The seller of string looked me up and down critically until his eye
caught my revolver in my belt, and then, apparently satisfied with my
appearance, he touched his chin and brow in salutation.

We ascended to the little platform, and a box was brought for me to sit
upon. A shout into the narrow alley brought me a cup of Turkish coffee.

“This is my friend, Salko,” Palok explained, in Italian, after the pair
had been apparently discussing me. “_Mio buon amico._ One of the best
men in the bazaar. For eight years we have been parted, and how pleased
I am to see him again.”

Salko interrupted, whereupon Palok said—

“My friend apologises, signore, that he cannot take coffee with you, or
offer you a cigarette. It is Ramadan, you know.”

I offered Salko my case, and, taking a cigarette, he placed it aside
until after sunset, touching his chin and brow and laughing merrily.

I wanted to buy several things in the bazaar—a piece or two of old
silver, if I could find it—and some antique embroideries which Palok had
told me I could find. He told Salko this, whereupon he shouted outside
to a passer-by, and in a moment the news was all over the bazaar, and
all sorts and conditions of men appeared with various things for sale:
beautiful silver-mounted and gem-studded pistols and swords, old silver
ornaments, embroideries of the sixteenth century, genuine antiques of
all sorts, old jewellery—in fact, in a quarter of an hour Salko’s little
shed-like shop presented the appearance of that of an antique dealer.

Two gorgeous Turkish ladies’ costumes attracted me. The trousers were of
silk, and interwoven with real gold and silver thread; the boleros of
rich crimson velvet, wonderfully embroidered with gold; the sashes gay;
and the little fezes, with golden sequins, smart and coquettish. They
were the real thing, and could be worn at a fancy-dress ball in England
with certain success.

I liked them, for they were the genuine thing. Dresses such as they were
are not made nowadays. Turkish ladies of to-day prefer the lighter
stuffs of the Franks, silks from Paris, and figured gauzes from Germany.
Those dresses had once graced the harem of some great Pasha—perhaps,
indeed, that of the Sultan himself. So I allowed Salko to bargain for
them.

I watched, and was amused.

The man who had them to sell apparently asked a price that was
exorbitant, whereupon my friend, with a wave of his hand, ordered him to
pack them back in the bundle.

High words followed, and I expected every moment the pair would come to
blows. The vendor was a round, fat-faced eunuch, with an ugly scar
across his brown cheek. And while the controversy was in progress, the
others who had wares to offer squatted about and advised each side as to
how much the costumes were really worth. Then at last both sides got at
loggerheads, hard words were used and insulting gestures; fists were
shaken, and angry scowls exchanged, until I momentarily expected that
there would be a free fight and bloodshed.

[Illustration: My friend Salko outside his house in Skodra.]

[Illustration: Pietro’s sister-in-law unveiled before the Camera.]

One man I noticed who had not spoken was fingering the hilt of his
knife, as though itching to join in the fray.

“I’m going out of this,” I told Palok, whereupon he only laughed.

“There’s really nothing to fear, signore. It is always so. They ask
double, and Salko is teaching the fellow manners. You are a foreigner,
and you don’t understand.”

I admitted that I did not.

The argument continued, and in the end the fat-faced eunuch was bundled
out by Salko into the dirty alley and his goods thrown after him.

Nobody smiled. Such treatment seemed usual, and on the following day I
bought the dresses.

The next was a little old Turk with a long white beard, who had an old
silver ornament for sale, one of those triangular boxes which women wear
round their necks containing scraps of the Koran, supposed to protect
them from the influence of the Evil Eye.

Though he came meek and humble, Salko glared at him. No. The Englishman
was his guest, and he would see that only what was just was paid. He
took the ornament from me, and weighing it in his hand, judged its
worth. Two other men agreed, and the old man, without being consulted,
was handed the money and told to be gone.

Assuredly business methods are quaint in the town we Europeans call
Scutari.

Another after another—shopkeepers, all of them in the same category as
Salko himself—was interviewed. Those who offered rubbish were promptly
ordered out. And so, before me, seated upon my box, was unfolded the
treasures of the bazaar.

And assuredly some of the curios offered were fit to grace any museum.
Seldom does a foreigner visit Skodra, therefore it still contains many
real antiques; and there being no sale for them, prices are not
exorbitant. It is, indeed, one of the few places left where one can
obtain anything worth having.

A long, lean Christian, in his flat round fez and enormous tassel,
offered me nine early Greek gold coins that had only a week before been
discovered in a tomb. I doubted the tomb part of the story, but I was
afterwards shown it half a mile away, and could also have bought the
actual vase in which they had been found. I am not a collector of coins,
so I declined them. One day, however, those coins will, no doubt, find
their way into one of our European national collections, for they were
so perfect that they looked as though just fresh from the matrix.

I was turning over in my hand a number of antique gem rings, when of a
sudden, just outside, not a dozen yards from where I sat, there was a
loud shout, followed by a pistol-shot. Then more shouting, and a little
crowd gathered. In alarm I sprang to my feet, and I saw outside a
mountaineer, in white felt skullcap, lying in a pool of blood with part
of his face blown away.

A man in black-and-white trousers stalked past, flourishing his big
pistol and threatening to shoot anybody who dared to stop him. He was
the assassin.

“It is nothing, signore,” Palok declared, reseating himself. “Only the
blood-feud. The men were _in sangue_, and have met. In such cases one
must always die. The man who shoots first gets the best of it,” and he
grinned.

For fully five minutes the man lay in the filthy gutter without a hand
being placed upon him to see if life were extinct. Then it occurred to
somebody to see. He was pronounced dead, and a couple of men carried
away the corpse. No police or guard put in an appearance, and the life
of the bazaar went on as though nothing unusual had happened.

But nothing unusual had happened. Such assassinations occur every day,
and nobody takes any heed of them. The blood-feud is part of the
Albanian creed, both Mohammedan and Christian.

It is not, however, pleasant to have a man shot dead before one’s eyes,
nor does it tend to inspire confidence in one’s own personal safety.

This was my first experience of the murderous instinct of the wild
Albanian, but ere three days I had still other opportunities of
reflecting upon Palok’s remark that Skodra was not so safe a place as it
looked.

Indeed, the town itself is, at intervals, threatened with massacre.
Every now and then rumours fly round that the mountain tribes are about
to descend upon the place and drive out the Turks. Then everybody
retires to their houses—each residence has high walls, and is more or
less a fortress—the bazaar is closed, the shops are barricaded, and the
ragged soldiers of the Sultan assemble under their greasy-tunicked
officers—and wait.

The blow for liberty has not yet been struck by the Albanians, but it
will assuredly come ere long.

I wanted to investigate, and get at the truth. That is the reason why
those high, blue, misty mountains that I could see afar from the narrow,
crooked streets of Skodra held me in such fascination; that is why I
disregarded all advice to the contrary, and determined to visit the
Albanian at home in his rocky fastness.

That same night, after Salko had bargained for me, I was eating my
evening meal—of pork—when another shot sounded out in the dark, unlit
street.

It was nothing, I was told by Palok five minutes later. A man had been
found dead in the darkness. That was all.

The average number of assassinations in Scutari is about three per day.
Nobody cares, for justice is nobody’s business except that of the dead
man’s brother, or his next-of-kin.

True, there is an Imperial Court of Justice, a lath-built shed with
gaping holes in the roof. Its steps are moss-grown, and its windows
mostly broken or devoid of glass.

Outside the place, after midday, the brave defenders of the Ottoman
Empire, those shoeless men with their ragged uniforms dropping off them,
sell their ration of bread to the passer-by in order to get money to buy
cigarettes. They remain unpaid, and their bread is their only source of
income. And upon the protection of these Skodra has to rely.

Is it any wonder that when sinister rumour runs through the bazaar,
everybody shoulders his rifle and sits on his wall, prepared to defend
his own home?




                              CHAPTER III
                            THE LAWLESS LAND

My friend Pietro—Visit to his house—His wife and sister-in-law unveil
    and are photographed—Scutarine hospitality—Forbidden newspapers—I
    get one in secret—The Turkish post office—I want to visit the
    Accursed Mountains—Difficulties and fears—The Feast of the
    Madonna—Christians and Mohammedans—My first meeting with the dreaded
    Skreli—Shots in the night.


Those bright, sunny autumn days in Skodra will live for a long time
within my memory.

Though a stranger in that half-savage place, where law and order are
unknown, I received perhaps more genuine hospitality from perfect
strangers than in any other place in the Balkan Peninsula.

Through Palok’s introduction I quickly found myself among friends, who
exerted their utmost in order to entertain me, and went out of their
way, even in face of their own national customs and beliefs, to oblige
me. The Albanian idea of hospitality is old-world and charming. A case
in point was one of my friends, a wealthy Scutarine merchant named
Pietro Lekha, whose portrait is here reproduced. He was a Christian, and
spoke a little Italian. At first, when I was introduced to him in the
bazaar, he was silent and taciturn, apparently regarding me with some
suspicion; but very soon this wore off, and we became the best of
friends. We took coffee together constantly, and he gave me exquisite
cigarettes. In Albania there is no _régie_, as in other parts of Turkey,
therefore one can choose from the peasant-women the very best light
tobacco in leaf, have it cut, and afterwards employ professional
cigarette-makers to manufacture you cigarettes. I did this, and sent a
quantity of cigarettes of the very first quality to England, far milder
and sweeter than any to be purchased in Constantinople—or anywhere else
in the world, for the matter of that.

[Illustration: ROK, tribesman of the Skreli.]

[Illustration: PIETRO LEKHA.]

Finding that I was taking photographs, Pietro became interested. He
accompanied me on my expeditions, and we had spent some days together
before I dared to inquire about his wife, the veiled lady whom I had
once had pointed out to me in the bazaar.

Palok had told me that Pietro’s brother had, three months ago, married
the most beautiful girl in Skodra, and that he and his young wife lived
at Pietro’s house. A bold thing then occurred to me—to beg permission to
photograph them.

I knew well that these people were averse to having their photographs
taken; nevertheless I very discreetly broached the subject one day when
sipping coffee with Pietro.

He gave me no decided answer. Indeed, he declared himself ready in any
way to serve me, but as to photographing his women-kind—well, it was
against all custom. What would his friends say if they knew?

I dropped the subject, rather crestfallen. I wanted to be invited to his
house and to meet his wife and sister-in-law, both of whom were declared
to be very beautiful. Yet he seemed in no way inclined to so far extend
his hospitality. I spoke to Palok and urged him to use his power of
persuasion, with the result that two days later I received an invitation
from Pietro to call upon him at his house at three o’clock to take
coffee, and further, he added—

“If you really wish to bring your camera, you may. I have spoken to my
brother, and he will let you take a picture of his wife, providing you
give your undertaking not to make any copies for sale, or to show it
here to people in Skodra.”

I willingly gave the undertaking, and at the appointed hour, accompanied
by Palok, we rang at the big gate in a high white, prison-like wall that
enclosed my friend’s dwelling, and were admitted into the garden, in the
centre of which stood a great square house.

Pietro came forward to greet me, a picturesque figure in his Scutarine
dress, the flat fez with big tassel, the embroidered coat, baggy
trousers, and white stockings. The ground floor was devoted to stables,
but above we found ourselves in a large square apartment with divans.
Upon the floor were beautiful Eastern rugs. On one side was the big,
gaudily painted dowry-chest, and here and there small low tables. The
room, with its heavy hangings, was very cosy, and over everything was
the sweet odour of otto-of-rose. In one corner was a great brass
brazier, and upon a chiffonier were a few European knick-knacks,
evidently household treasures. The only picture on the wall was a small
oleograph of the Madonna.

A rush-bottomed chair was produced for me, while Pietro and Palok
squatted cross-legged upon the divans. Then the servant was sent to
inform the ladies of our arrival.

Presently both wife and sister-in-law entered, gorgeous in silk and
gold, the most striking costumes I have ever seen off the stage. White
gauze veils were wrapped about their heads and corsage, leaving only
their eyes visible; and thus attired they saluted me and, with Pietro
acting as interpreter, welcomed me.

Afterwards they retired, and at Pietro’s order reappeared without their
veils. The younger woman was indeed lovely, with a fair white skin,
beautiful soft lines of beauty, magnificent black eyes, and lips that
puckered into a sweet, modest smile when I involuntarily expressed my
surprise at her marvellous good looks. I had heard that Albanian ladies
were beautiful, but I certainly never expected to be presented to such a
type of feminine loveliness.

Over her bare chest hung strings of great gold coins, while across her
brow were rows of sequins. Her richly embroidered dress, the jewels in
her ears, the bangles upon her arms, all enhanced her great personal
beauty, while she stood before me, her face downcast in modesty—for
except her husband and his brother no man had ever beheld her unveiled.

At that moment her husband entered, and I congratulated him upon the
possession of such a beautiful wife. Then we all laughed together, and
descended to the garden, where I was allowed to take photographs of her,
veiled and unveiled, as well as of Pietro’s wife, who was, of course,
much her senior, and who, although she had lost her youthful beauty, was
still very charming.

Returning again to the upstairs salon, we all sat round, while the
newly-married beauty brought us first lemonade, then delicious Turkish
coffee in tiny round cups upon a great gilt tray, followed by _rakhi_,
that spirit so dear to the Turkish palate, and afterwards real
_rahat-lakoum_, or Turkish delight.

Then, after an interval, veiled again once more, the beautiful young
woman brought me a cigarette and lit it for me, afterwards wishing me
adieu and modestly retiring.

All was done with such perfect grace and modesty as to create a most
charming experience. It was, to say the least, novel, to sit there with
those squatting Albanians and be waited upon by the prettiest girl in
Skodra.

Pietro told me that newspapers and books being forbidden, anyone found
in possession of them was at once arrested. He, however, gave me
surreptitiously a copy of the Rome _Tribuna_, which had been smuggled in
a day or two before; and it was welcome, being the first newspaper I had
had for several weeks.

Truly Skodra is a strange place. I had occasion to go to the Turkish
post office one day. It was, I found, a wooden shed. Inside was a low,
filthy truckle bed, a small table—at which sat a consumptive youth in a
fez—a broken chair and a large iron safe, the door being secured by a
piece of string being tied about it!

Of drainage there is none. Sewage runs down the centre of most of the
streets, especially in the bazaar, and its odour is the reverse of
pleasant on a sunny day. In the neighbourhood of butchers and
slaughterers the gutters run with blood, which the dogs lap and enjoy,
and near the stalls of fruiterers and vegetable-sellers the piles of
refuse rot in the sun and decay.

Yet everywhere, both in the streets of the Mohammedan quarter and in
those of the Christians, are interesting sights at every turn. When
night falls the place is dark and mysterious, for there are no lights
save that issuing from the chinks of a door or from the windows of a
barber or a coffee-seller. Through the windows of a mosque, perhaps, can
be seen the swaying figures of Turks at prayer, faint in the dim oil
lights, while in the blackness of the street the patrol passes, a dozen
Turkish soldiers with loaded rifles, headed by one man carrying a
lantern. The place is insecure after nightfall, even to the Scutarines
themselves, therefore nobody ventures out, and by nine o’clock every
house is bolted and barred.

At that hour, it being Ramadan, the Turk was feasting and taking his
ease, while opposite the _han_ where I lived a Turkish soldier would
come nightly and sing weird prayers under the window of the Governor of
the _vilayet_, that perfectly useless official, whose authority extends
only to the confines of the town itself, and who fears to exercise it
lest he should rouse the slumbering ire of those fierce tribes who live
in the Accursed Mountains above.

Many strange sights I witnessed and many strange things I heard in
Skodra.

Men, fierce mountaineers who, in some cases, bore across their
countenances marks of sword or gun-shot wounds, told me their
stories—exciting narratives of love, war, and the blood-feud. All were
Albanians, and believed Skodra to be the finest capital in the world.
England, because it carried on no political intrigue among them, like
Austria and Italy, they did not regard as a Power. Mine was a country
far away, I was told, and therefore perfectly harmless. Hardly anybody
had heard of London. Those who had, declared that it could not be so
large or so beautiful as Skodra.

The days I spent there were with the one object of obtaining, by some
means, permission from one or other of the mountain chieftains to allow
me to travel in the country.

Palok had promised to endeavour to arrange it for me, and so had Pietro,
but by their manner I saw that they considered any such attempt a piece
of sheer folly, and far too hazardous. They were too polite to tell me
so, but I read in their faces that they did not intend me to go, if it
were possible to prevent me.

Therefore surreptitiously I had recourse to my faithful friend of the
bazaar, Salko, himself a member of the fierce tribe of the Skreli, who
had more than once terrorised the town. When, through an interpreter, I
one evening explained my desire, he rubbed his chin doubtfully and
wagged his head. He would do his best, but it was dangerous—very
dangerous, he declared.

And yet, he went on, the thing might perhaps be managed. An Albanian of
the mountains, though he might be a brigand and annoyed the Turks, and
though he might shoot Turkish soldiers like dogs wherever met, was
nevertheless a man of his word. If I was promised safe escort, then I
might go into the mountains without even my revolver, for no harm would
come to me.

Yes; he would promise to see what he could do. But it was difficult, and
it would take time. In the mountains they had no great love of
foreigners.

To the coming Feast of the Madonna many men from the mountains would
arrive, and there would be opportunity to speak with them. No; he would
say nothing to Palok—if I so wished. Therefore I waited, and hoped.

Now the celebrated Madonna of Loretto was, before the Turkish occupation
of Skodra, at the little ruined church near the Boyana River, and even
now down to the annual _festà_ come representatives of all the various
tribes, men and women, from sometimes a week’s journey distant, filling
the streets with a perfect panorama of colour and costume.

The Feast of the Madonna is indeed the day to see Skodra at her best.

You may travel the whole of Europe, from the Channel to the Urals, or
from the White Sea to the Bosphorus, and you will never see such a
variety of types and of costume as during the two days of that feast.

That clear sunny morning the whole town was agog. The Christians had it
to themselves, for while they feasted the Mohammedans fasted. The two
peoples keep distinctly apart during religious festivals, and Turkish
soldiers, their blue uniforms green with age, greasy at the collar, and
often shoeless, patrol the town, ready to fire on the people at the
least provocation. At least, so they say. If, however, they did fire,
then woe-betide them! Every man goes armed in Skodra, and the garrison
would certainly be wiped out were the alarm once given to those wild
fellows up in the mountains.

All is orderly, however—all brilliant. The streets are full of
Christians from the country, the men tall, thin-legged fellows, with
black-and-white striped trousers and black furry bolero, carrying loaded
rifles upon their shoulders; and the women in the various gay costumes
of the tribes, each wearing profusions of gold coins strung across their
breasts, heavy gold earrings, and the younger married ones with dozens
of gaudy silk handkerchiefs suspended round their heavy brass or iron
studded girdles, presents to them on their recent marriage. Most of the
_katunnare_ (peasant-women from the plains) are dressed in a short black
homespun skirt and bodice combined, reaching to the knees and
embroidered with red. Around the waist is a heavy hide belt about five
inches broad, studded with iron, and with two big polished cornelians to
form the buckle. Some are of antique silver of beautiful workmanship,
and others, more modern, are gilt. These women wear nothing on their
heads, but the gaily-dressed _malzore_ (women of the mountains) wear a
bright silk handkerchief arranged very much in the same manner as the
women around Naples. The _malzore_ are extremely good-looking, and all
carry a small embroidered sack over their shoulder, for in Skodra on the
night prior to the _Festà_ of the Madonna every Christian house is open
to receive visitors and give them food and shelter, whoever they may be.
So these little sacks contain humble presents to the hosts.

Pietro met me in the street as I was going to the Cathedral, and told me
that on the previous night he had given food and beds to twenty-eight
mountaineers of both sexes. Albanian hospitality is certainly unbounded.

[Illustration: The Madonna of Skodra.]

[Illustration: The Procession with an Armed Guard.]

As I strolled through the narrow lanes of the Christian quarter towards
the Cathedral, and the gaily-dressed chattering women in groups hurried
forward to get a place within, I was struck with their neat and clean
appearance. Their finery was in no way dingy or dusty, and yet many of
them had been a whole week on a journey through perhaps the roughest
region in the whole East.

How different was the _festà_ to that I had known in the Italian towns!

About the Cathedral there is nothing unusually attractive—a big bare
edifice with high square campanile in modern Italian style. It stands in
the centre of an open space, surrounded by great high, fortress-like
walls, entered by a strong gate with huge iron bars—significant that one
day ere long it will be held against the Turks. No Mohammedan ever
passes those gates. Even the military patrol lounge outside, leaning on
their rifles.

Within the enclosure I found a great crowd of peasant women; females of
the town, veiled with gauze so fine that one could almost see their
faces; Scutarine men in their best jackets and baggy trousers; and the
swaggering, white-capped warriors from the mountains, men of the
Miriditi,—so dreaded by the Turks that they are allowed to carry their
rifles with them,—of the fierce Skreli, the Hoti, and the Kastrati.

The Skreli, with the Miriditi, are allowed to carry their rifles because
the Turks hold them in fear. The authorities know full well that to
arouse their ire would be to bring destruction upon the whole _vilayet_,
for they hold the communications, and if the tribes revolted, as they no
doubt would, then the army of the Sultan would have a very hard task to
suppress the rebellion.

So while the Kastrati and the Hoti—also dwellers in the Mountains of the
Accursed—the Klementi, the Shiala of the foot-hills, and the others are
compelled to leave their rifles at the entrance to the town, the Skreli
and the Miriditi stalk along in armed bands of twenty or thirty through
the streets to the church, grinning defiance at the Turks, who are
supposed by Europe to be their masters.

Under the trees around the Cathedral the wild, fierce men, who would
hold the traveller to ransom or shoot him with less compunction than
they would kill a shepherd-dog, were squatting in rings with their
rifles before them, gossiping. Every man wore a belt full of cartridges
and a bandolier across his shoulders—sometimes even two. War and
religion are strangely mixed in Skodra.

Into the dimly-lit Cathedral I managed to squeeze, and there, kneeling
on the stones and filling the whole place right out into the grass
enclosure, were men of all grades, from the peaceful Scutarine merchant
to the wild tribesman, and women with their faces uncovered bowed
towards the brilliantly lit altar, where the thin-faced Italian priest
mumbled the prayers.

The sight was strangely impressive; the silence unbroken save for the
low voice of the priest and now and then the clank of arms.

For two days in the year, to celebrate the Christian festival, the
brigand tribes from the mountains come down, notwithstanding that upon
the heads of many of those sinister-looking men before me the Turks had
long ago set a price. I stood gazing at that kneeling throng, to whom,
though devout and humble in God’s house, murder was deemed no wrong.

The service ended, a great procession was formed, and headed by four
fine stalwart men of the Skreli with loaded rifles, made a slow tour
from the altar outside and round the enclosure, while an orchestra in a
band-stand opposite played selections. The sight was curious—those armed
men ready to protect their priests in case of sudden onslaught by the
Turks.

During the whole morning I took many photographs, and in the afternoon,
when I returned, I found the orchestra playing operatic music, which was
being listened to by the tribesmen with marked attention. They are, I
afterwards found, devoted to music. The programme ranged from selections
from _La Bohème_ and _Carmen_ to the “Segovia” valse and our old
melodious friend, “The Honeysuckle and the Bee.” The latter air quickly
became popular among the tribesmen, who picked it up and began at once
to whistle it.

[Illustration: The Mirediti: An Alarm!]

[Illustration: The Mirediti at Prayer.]

Slowly fell the mystic twilight of the East. The glorious afterglow had
deepened into grey, and night was creeping on quickly when fire balloons
were sent up, and then gradually the whole Cathedral became outlined in
fairy lamps against the steely sky, even to the utmost point of the high
square tower. Men and women gazed upward, and crossed themselves.

Later, while walking back with Palok, we encountered a group of armed
tribesmen talking excitedly, shaking their fists, and apparently
quarrelling. Palok joined the crowd, and inquired what had happened.
Then, turning to me, he said—

“Oh, it is nothing, signore. The town of Kroia has revolted. The Turks
sent soldiers yesterday, but they were Albanians, and would not fire on
the people. To-day some artillery arrived, and thirty people have been
killed—mostly women. A man has just ridden in with the news. It is
nothing. We are always fighting the Turks at Kroia. There will probably
be a massacre to-night.” And he deftly rolled a cigarette as he spat in
defiance of the hated Mussulman.

Later that night I was awakened from sleep by a shot below, and, taking
my revolver, went to the window. The night was black, and I could
discern nothing.

I heard men’s voices raised in the street below, and suddenly saw the
red flash of firearms and heard a second report.

Then all was quiet, except receding footsteps.

The shots disturbed nobody, or if they did, nobody opened door or
window. The town was asleep, and by the distant sound of a tom-tom I
knew that the hour was half-past three; for the music was calling upon
the Faithful to eat, preparatory to the day’s fast.

What had happened? All was silent, therefore I closed my window and
slept again.

In the morning I was told that it was “nothing.” Two men of the Shiala
had been found dead outside.

Was it the blood-feud? I asked.

Palok only raised his shoulders and exhibited his palms.

“It was nothing, signore—really nothing.”




                               CHAPTER IV
                       IN THE ACCURSED MOUNTAINS

Vatt Marashi, chief of the Skreli tribe, invites me to become his
    guest—Our start for the Accursed Mountains—Rok, our
    guide—Independence of the Skreli—Brigandage and the _bessa_—A night
    under a rock—My meeting with Vatt Marashi and his band—The Skreli
    welcome—How they treat the Turks—Vatt’s admissions—I become the
    guest of brigands—A chat in the moonlight.


While seated on the box in Salko’s dark little stall in the bazaar he
introduced his friend Rok to me.

A middle-aged tribesman in the regulation costume of tight white woollen
trousers heavily striped with black, black bolero with deep woollen
fringe, and a felt skullcap, once white, but now not overclean, he
squatted opposite me and touched chin and brow in salute. His loaded
rifle lay before him on the ground.

He eyed me critically up and down, my pigskin gaiters apparently
receiving his admiration.

“Rok, here, is of the Skreli, a fearless fighter of the Turks and one of
my best friends,” Salko went on to explain. “I have told him of your
earnest desire to go and see our country; that you are neither Austrian
nor Italian, but English and not a spy. Our friend is returning to-day,
and has promised to speak to Vatt Marashi, our chief, on your behalf.”

“Tell the honourable Englishman that if he comes to us he must be
prepared for a rough life. We live in the mountains,” Rok said through
the interpreter, laughing pleasantly as he lit the cigarette he took
from my case.

Coffee was brought, and we sealed our compact of friendliness.

If Vatt Marashi, the renowned chieftain who so often held travellers to
ransom, and whose influence was so dreaded by the Turks, consented to
allow me to visit him, then Rok would return, he promised, and be my
guide.

For half an hour we chatted and smoked. Then the burly mountaineer rose,
slung his rifle over his shoulder, touched chin and brow again, grasped
my hand warmly, and stalked out on his three days’ tramp to the wild
region in the mountain mists that was his home.

I waited on in Skodra, and, to my great delight, he one morning
reappeared with a message from his chief that, providing I took only
Palok, and had no escort, he would be pleased to welcome me and show me
all the hospitality in his power. I need fear nothing, it was added. I
was to be guest of Vatt Marashi, chief of the Skreli. He had issued the
order to the tribe. Any who dared to insult or injure me should pay for
it with their life. Therefore I should be given safe-conduct, and need
not have a moment’s anxiety.

By this, Palok, who had been entirely opposed to the attempt, became
reassured, and soon after noon, with a mule packed with my lightest
baggage, we set our faces out across the great rolling plain that lies
between the town and the high wall of blue distant mountains—the wildest
corner of all Europe. They are a series of fastnesses, in which any
small army would at once be massacred and where a large one would
starve.

We were a merry trio as we marched forward in the bright autumn
sunlight, but about a kilometre beyond the town the road ended in a
ford, where we crossed a wide shallow river, and then straight across
the plain and past several tumuli to where a defile showed in the
mountains. The ancient Bridge of Messi, built under the Venetian
dominion, was crossed, and then we had our first experience of the road
in Albania—a rough, narrow way gradually ascending, almost too bad even
for mules.

Nobody who has not visited Northern Albania can have any idea of the
wildness of those bare grey rocks, of the roughness of the tracks, or
the savagery of life there. Northern Albania is to-day just as it was
under the Roman Empire. The might of Rome has waned, the Servian has
come and gone, the Venetian has been swept away, and the Turk is now
nominally master. But the country has never, through all the centuries,
been annexed, and those wild tribes, descendants of the savage people
who inhabited those fastnesses before the days of Greek dominion, have
never been tamed. The Northern Albanian is the last survivor of mediæval
days. He has no written language—indeed, his alphabet, with its many
soft and hard “ssh” sounds, has never yet been determined—therefore he
has no literature and no newspaper. Thin, wiry, and muscular, he wears
raw-hide slippers, in which he moves with cat-like, stealthy tread—a
habit survived from prehistoric days—while his very dress is protective,
rendering him at a short distance difficult to discern, so like is he in
colour to the rocky background. He looks as though he had just stepped
down from a mediæval Florentine fresco, with his head half-shaven, hair
long at the back and cut square across the shoulders.

He is entirely unchanged ever since the Turk found him, except that of
late he has adopted the breech-loading rifle and a particularly heavy
pattern of revolver. The black furry bolero which he wears, without
exception, is the sign of mourning for his great prince, Skender Beg,
who died in 1467, after being at war with the Turks for over twenty
years; therefore with him fashions do not easily change, and “latest
novelties” in dress are unknown. Great are the changes that have come
over the world during the past thousand years or so, but Northern
Albania has remained unaffected by them, and is still in a measure in
the lowest depths of barbarism. The Turk does not rule. The wild,
inaccessible country is under the various independent tribes, ruled by a
chieftain according to unwritten laws which have been handed down orally
from remote ages, and one of the fiercest and most independent of these
chiefs was Vatt Marashi, the man whose guest I now was to be.

[Illustration: My road in Northern Albania.]

[Illustration: The way to the Skreli.]

Compared with the tribesmen, the Albanian Christian of Skodra is a puny
person. The mountaineers are a barbaric, lawless people, without any
education save the schools established by Italian and Austrian monks as
part of the political propaganda; for, truth to tell, both countries
have recently conceived the idea of turning Northern Albania to account
for their own purposes on the day of the downfall of the Turk. Therefore
both Powers are frantically exerting every effort to curry favour with
the people, a fact which is glaringly apparent even to the rough,
uneducated tribesmen themselves.

The Northern Albanian may be entirely uneducated and a barbarian, but he
is at heart a brigand, and is certainly no fool.

My friend Rok was particularly intelligent, and as we toiled along over
those rough, rock-strewn paths he gave me much information about his
country, and declared that both Austria and Italy were equally their
enemy.

After sundown we rested at a point high up above a dark gloomy defile,
where a stream wound away towards the plain, and there ate some slices
of cold mutton and black bread with a glass of _rakhi_, our three rifles
lying at hand in case of sudden emergency.

I had noticed the queer, sinuous, almost uncanny way in which Rok
walked. His movements, at even pace whatever might be the state of the
path, were stealthy. Indeed, he almost crept along, for his feet fell in
silence, and with his rifle ever ready, his keen black eyes were
searching on every side for the enemy which he appeared to expect to
meet at every turn.

Sometimes as he walked in front he would halt, and closely scan a mass
of tumbled rocks, as though he had suspicion of a lurking enemy, then
thoroughly satisfying himself, he would go forward again without
glancing back. He was certain that no enemy was in his rear.

From his movements and natural caution I could plainly see that we were
traversing a country not altogether friendly, and when, as we sat over
our evening meal, I asked Palok, his reply was—

“The Shiala are not on very friendly terms with the Skreli just now. But
it is nothing, signore—nothing.”

We went forward until darkness closed in, and then lay down to sleep
under an overhanging rock almost on the face of a sheer precipice, a
place in which Rok told us he often stayed on his way down to Skodra. He
humorously called it his _han_, or hotel.

To light a fire would be to attract hostile attention, and the cold up
there was intense. I tried to sleep, but was unable, therefore I rose
and sat outside in the bright, glorious moonlight and kept watch, while
Rok curled himself up like a dog and snored soundly in chorus with
Palok.

There, in the East, the full moon seems to shine with greater brilliance
than in Europe, and beneath its white rays those bare, rugged mountains
looked like a veritable fairyland. Only the cry of a night-bird and the
low music of the stream far below broke the stillness of the Oriental
night, and as I sat there I reflected that I was the first Englishman
who had ever been the guest of the redoubtable chieftain, Vatt Marashi,
the man whom the Turks so hate—the man of whom blood-curdling tales had
been told me both in Montenegro and in Skodra, and whose fame as a
leader of a wild band had not long before been proclaimed by the London
newspapers.

For hours I sat thinking, sometimes of my good fortune, at others of my
perilous position alone in the hands of such a people. But I had heard
that, notwithstanding their barbaric customs, an Albanian’s word was his
bond. Therefore I reassured myself that I should not be the victim of
treachery, and reported to Constantinople as “missing.”

Slowly at last the moon paled, and I grew sleepy. That terrible road had
worn me out. Therefore I woke Palok to mount guard, and flung myself
down in his place and slept till the sun, shining in my face, awakened
me.

Through the whole day we went forward again, over a path so bad that I
often had to scramble with difficulty. I tried to ride the mule, but it
was out of the question, so I walked and stumbled and was helped over
the rough boulders by my companions. The Skreli country was surely an
unapproachable region.

That night we slept again in the open, but in a spot less sheltered.
Then forward again with the first grey of dawn until, just before noon,
Rok halted in the narrow track which wound round the face of the bare
grey mountain, and, drawing his revolver, fired three times in the air.

The shots reverberated in a series of echoes. It was a signal, and
almost ere they had died away came three answering shots from no great
distance, and I was told that we were now in the Skreli region, and
there was nothing more to fear.

In Podgoritza, in Cettinje, in Skodra, and in Djakova I had heard
terrible stories of this fighting race, and of Vatt’s fierce hatred of
the Turks. Yet everyone had told me that, the chief having invited me, I
need have not a moment’s apprehension of my personal safety.

So I went forward, reassured, to meet my host.

Half an hour later I came face to face with real brigands—brigands who
looked like an illustration out of a boy’s story-book—the men who had so
often held up travellers and compelled the Turkish Government to pay
heavy ransoms.

They were about twenty, certainly the fiercest and most bloodthirsty
gang I have ever set my eyes upon. Dressed in the usual skin-tight white
woollen trousers with broad black bands running down the legs, a short
white jacket, also black-braided, the sleeveless woolly bolero of
mourning, hide shoes with uppers consisting of a network of string, and
small white skullcaps, each man carried in his belt a great
silver-mounted pistol of antique type and a silver-sheathed curved
knife, while around both shoulders were well-filled bandoliers, and in
the hand of each a rifle. Like Rok, the heads of all were shaved,
leaving a long tuft at the back in the mediæval Florentine style.

With one accord they all raised their rifles aloft and shouted me
welcome, whereupon one man stepped forward—a big, muscular fellow with
handsome face and proud gait—the great chief Vatt Marashi himself.

Attired very much as his followers, his dress was richer, the jacket
being ornamented with gold braid. The silver hilt of his pistol was
studded with coral and green stones, probably emeralds, but he carried
no rifle. Jauntily, and laughing merrily, he approached me and bent
until his forehead touched mine—the Skreli sign of welcome.

And all this in Europe in the twentieth century!

Was I dreaming? Was it real? I was the guest of actual brigands, those
men about whom I had read in story-books ever since those long-ago days
when the weekly _Boys of England_ formed my chief literature.

Vatt Marashi, holding my hand the while, addressed me. What he said was
interpreted into Italian by Palok as—

“You are welcome here to my country—very welcome. And you are
an Englishman, and have travelled so far to see us! It is
wonderful—wonderful! You live so far away—farther than Constantinople,
they say. Well, I cannot give you much here or make you very
comfortable—not so comfortable as you have been down in Skodra. But I
will do my best. Come—let us eat.”

I returned his greeting, whereupon the whole crowd of us walked along to
a spot where a cauldron was standing upon a wood fire, and out of it my
host, myself, and Palok had pieces of boiled chicken and rice, which had
specially been prepared for my coming.

The object of this meal, I afterwards learnt, was to cement our
friendship. The Albanian code of honour is astounding, even to our
Western ideas. A word once given by those savage tribes is never broken,
and if the stranger eats the food of the Skreli, even though he may be
an enemy, his person is sacred for twenty-four hours afterwards. While
the food remains undigested he may not be injured or captured.

And so while I ate with this wild chieftain, his band squatted round,
apparently discussing me.

It was probably the first time they had seen an Englishman, Palok
explained, and they were at first inclined to regard me as a secret
agent of the Government, until later that afternoon their chief assured
them to the contrary.

Then that wild horde became, to a man, my devoted servants.

[Illustration: VATT MARASHI, Chief of the Skreli tribe.]

Vatt, the _Baryaktar_ (from the Turkish _bairakdar_, or
standard-bearer), unlike most Albanians, is fair-haired, above the
average height, extremely muscular, with a constant smile of hearty
good-fellowship. His eyes are fierce and barbaric; nevertheless he is
pleasant of countenance, and I certainly found him, from first to last,
a staunch and excellent friend.

Lord of those wild, rugged mountains, his word was obeyed with a
precision that amazed me. A striking figure he presented as, with me, he
marched at head of his bodyguard, his chest thrown out proudly, his head
up, his keen eyes ever searching forward like every Albanian of the
hills, one of the wildest rulers of wildest Europe.

On every side, as we went forward to the tiny cluster of little houses
that formed the village where I was to be quartered, were bare grey
limestone rocks without a single blade of grass, a desolate mountain
region into which no foreigner had penetrated save when captured and
held to ransom. Through centuries have that same tribe ruled that barren
land, and no conqueror of Albania has ever succeeded in ousting them.

“You have, no doubt, heard down in Skodra terrible things about me,” he
said, laughing, as, later on, we walked together. He had rolled me a
cigarette and given it to me unstuck. “I expect you feared to come and
see me—eh?”

I admitted that I had heard things of him not altogether satisfactory.

“Ah!” he laughed, “that is because the Turks do not like us. Whenever a
Turkish soldier puts his foot a kilometre outside Skodra, we either take
away his Mauser and send him back, or else—well, we shoot him first.”

“But they say that your men capture travellers.”

“And why not?” he asked. “We are Christians. Is it not permissible for
us to do everything to annoy those devils of Turks? But,” he added, “if
they say that I treat my prisoners badly, they lie. Why, they get plenty
of food and are well treated. I give them some shooting if they like—and
they generally enjoy themselves. But I know. I too have been told that
the Turks say I once cut off a man’s ears. Bah! all Turks are liars.”

“Then it is only to annoy the Turks that your men commit acts of
brigandage?”

“Of course. The ransom is useful to us, I admit, but we live by our
flocks, and our wants are few. We are not like the people down in
Skodra. We are better, I hope.”

“And do you always watch the roads on the other side of the mountains
yonder?”

“Always. Our men are there now, all along the route between Ipek and
Prisrend. Who knows who may not pass along—a rich Pasha perhaps.” And
his face relaxed into a humorous smile at thought of such a prize.

And then I marched along, my rifle over my shoulder—a brigand for the
nonce like my host.

Surely it was one of the quaintest experiences of a varied and
adventurous life.

The tiny house in which I was given quarters had an earthen floor and
consisted of two rooms, the ceilings and walls of which were blackened
by the smoke of years. The owner was an old man with his wife and
daughter, the latter being a pretty young woman of about nineteen,
dressed in the gorgeous gala costume with golden sequins, the same that
I had seen down at Skodra during the _festà_. She had on her best in my
honour, I suppose, and her husband, a good-looking young fellow five
years her senior, seemed justly proud of her. His name was Lûk. I named
him Lucky, but he did not appreciate the wit. He was, I found, one of
the chief’s bodyguard who had come to greet me at the confines of the
Skreli territory, and proved a most sociable fellow, ever ready to
render me a service.

“These good people will look after you and make you as comfortable as
they can,” my host said, when he had introduced me to them. “I have to
go along the ravine, but will return in time to eat with you this
evening. You like good cigarettes? I will send you some.” And he shook
my hands, and turning, went out, stalking again at the head of his
ferocious-looking band.

[Illustration: The Skreli at Home.]

[Illustration: An Albanian Village.]

The bedroom, occupied in common by the family, was given over to me. My
bed on the floor was a big sack filled with dried maize-leaves. It was
not inviting, but Palok, having examined it critically, declared it to
be “_cosi cosi_,” and having slept out a couple of nights, I was
compelled to accept his verdict.

The girl in the sequins boiled us coffee over the fire, and with her
father and husband I sat outside the house in the golden sunset, smoking
and chatting. Both were full of curiosity. England was to them a mere
legendary land, and they had never heard of London. When I mentioned it
they declared that it could not possibly be so large as Skodra.

I told them of Cettinje and other towns in Montenegro I had visited, but
they held all Montenegro in contempt, for were they not always raiding
over the frontier? Lûk declared that he had walked in Podgoritza openly,
and in the marketplace shot a man with whom he was in _gyak_, or
blood-feud.

“I walked out again, and no one dared to stop me,” he added, with pride.
“It would have been worse for them if they had.”

“But the Montenegrins are no cowards,” I ventured to remark.

“Certainly not. They are very brave, but they dare not follow us here.
They always get lost in the mountains, and once they lose their way they
lose their lives,” he added, with a grin. “Our men killed four over
yonder mountain a few days ago.”

“The blood-feud?”

“Of course. It arose out of that.”

From the half-dozen other poor mountain homes came forth men, women, and
children, who grouped around us, watching in curiosity. According to
Palok, rumour had at first gone round that I was a prisoner, therefore
they had refrained from coming forth to see me. Now, however, they knew
the truth, they welcomed me as their guest.

Just before it grew dark the _Baryaktar_ returned, followed by the
bodyguard, without whom he never seemed to move. They did his bidding,
executed his orders, and were ever at his beck and call—the picked men
of the tribe.

While Vatt squatted on the floor I sat upon my suit-case, and together
we ate a kind of mutton stew, rather rich, but not unpalatable. There
was an absence of table cutlery, therefore we ate with the aid of our
pocket-knives and fingers. Now and then the old woman would pick a
tit-bit out of the pot and hand it to me with her fingers. I was
compelled to accept the well-meant hospitality, even though her hands
were not particularly clean.

The hot dish was tasty, but I could not manage the sour black bread, for
it was mouldy, and gritty into the bargain.

It was a weird picture, the interior of that lowly hut, lit by the dim
oil lamp of almost the same type as used by the early Greeks. The
uncertain firelight glinted upon the gold of the dresses of the
chieftain and of Lûk’s pretty wife, and threw, now and then, into relief
those strangely unfamiliar faces, the barbarians of an age bygone and
forgotten. The very language they were speaking was, as an unwritten
one, utterly incomprehensible and unintelligible to any but the born
Albanian.

I rubbed my eyes—on account of the smoke—wondering if it were really
only a very few weeks ago that I had driven a motor from London down to
Windsor, that I had seen _The Catch of the Season_, and trod the red
carpet of the Savoy afterwards.

And to-night I was actually having supper with real live brigands of the
mountains!

Lûk produced a bottle of _rakhi_, and Vatt Marashi lifted his tin mug to
me. I took a little of the potent spirit in the bottom of my own
drinking-cup, and tossed it off. It was not half as bad as I expected.

Then the chief took me outside the house, and in the clear moonlight we
sat down with Palok upon a big rock to chat.

He rolled me a cigarette of most excellent Turkish tobacco—of his own
growing, he told me—lit one himself, and we sipped the coffee brought to
us by Lûk’s wife.

The scene spread before us was superb—a magnificent panorama of
mountains, some tipped with snow, white and brilliant under the
moonbeams. Below us, the valley was a great chasm of unfathomable
blackness.

With my strange host I chatted upon many subjects, and found him far
more intelligent than I had believed. Keen-witted, quick of perception,
just in his judgment, and yet filled with an intense hatred of both Turk
and Montenegrin alike, he explained to me many things of great interest.

He told me of the glorious traditions of his sturdy race and of the
prince of the Skender Beg family, who, they hoped, would one day come
back to rule them.

“We, the chieftains, hold authority from him,” he declared. “Oh yes, he
will come some day. Of that we are quite certain.”

“Englishmen have never dared to come here, have they?” I asked, with
some curiosity.

“Only once—a year or two ago. I discovered three of your compatriots
poking about in the rocks and chipping little pieces off. I had them
captured, and brought to me. At first I thought I would hold them to
ransom and make the Turks pay. But they were evidently poor fellows, for
their clothes were worn almost to rags, and they had very little money.
So I gave them their money back and sent them with an escort down to the
plain, forbidding them to enter our country again. I wonder why they
came, and why they were chipping the rocks?”

I told him that they were evidently mining prospectors; that Englishmen
travelled all over the world to discover minerals; and that a mine in
his country would be a source of great wealth. But my explanation did
not appeal to him. He could not see why they were chipping off those
pieces of rock. It was not flint, otherwise they might have wanted them
for gun-locks. No, the trio were distinctly suspicious characters, and
he was glad that he had expelled them.

“Have you ever held Englishmen to ransom?” I inquired.

“One. Five years ago. He came here shooting—after bears, I think. He was
evidently a great gentleman, for his guns were beautiful. The Turks paid
promptly.”

“Because he was an Englishman—eh?”

“Most probably,” he laughed. “Are they afraid of you English as they are
afraid of us?”

And soon afterwards he bade me good-night, and left me to throw myself
down upon my mattress of leaves and listen to the snoring of Palok and
the assembled family in the adjoining room.

I had thought Skodra barbaric, but here I was in an utterly unknown
corner of the earth, in an absolutely savage land—a land that knows no
law and acknowledges no master; a land that is the same to-day as it was
in the days of Diocletian and of Constantine the Great—Albania the
Unchanging.

[Illustration: Among the Skreli: Lûk (first on the right) and his
friends.]




                               CHAPTER V
                        LIFE WITH A BRIGAND BAND

The Skreli a lawless tribe—No man’s life safe unless the chief gives his
    word—Vatt prophesies a rising against the Turks—Our walks and
    talks—Our meeting with our neighbours the Kastrati, and with Dêd
    Presci their chief—A woman who avenged her husband’s death—The
    significant story of Kol—Manners and customs of the wild
    tribes—Farewell to my good friend Dêd—An incident a fortnight later.


The bright sunny days I remained with the Skreli were full of interest.

On every hand, from Vatt himself down to the humblest of his tribe, I
received only the greatest kindness and hospitality. If I went out in
Vatt’s absence, a dozen armed banditti followed me, mounting guard over
me; for, as they told me, one never knew what little “accident” might
happen. With the tribes of the Shiala and the Pulati they were not just
then on particularly friendly terms, and there had been a series of
sharp encounters a week ago. Having given their word to be responsible
for my safety, it behoved them to take precautions.

I walked with Vatt Marashi every day, making long excursions through the
mountains by the secret paths known only to the tribe.

Would I care for some sport? If I cared to come next year and bring a
friend, or even two, he would let me shoot. My friends would always be
welcome, and I could assure them of their safety. There was plenty of
game, and lots of bears, lynx, and wolves. I should tell my friends in
England, and come back for a month or two. I promised that I would, for
in our walks I saw quantities of game. My friend shot several eagles,
but I was not successful in bagging one.

As he was stalking at my side one afternoon, his argus eyes everywhere
and a cigarette in his mouth, I returned to the subject of the Turks and
their “occupation” of Albania.

“Bah!” he exclaimed, with a sneering curl of the lip. “They dare not
come here. We, with the Kastrati, the Hoti, the Klementi, the Pulati,
and the Shiala, are masters here. We have held the land always, and
shall hold it still. We acknowledge no law except our own, and pay no
taxes to anybody. The Turks, when they conquered Northern Albania,
thought they could crush us. They tried to, but soon discovered their
mistake. So ever since that they have left us severely alone, and
retired into Skodra. They know full well that when we unite with our
brothers, the Miriditi, in the south, then Skodra will be at our mercy.”

“And if the Sultan sends his soldiers here?”

“Well, and what then?” he asked, with a flash in his eyes. “Do you think
we fear them? Many of them are Albanians, and would not fight us. Again,
you have experienced the road here. What would an army do here? We
should pick them off as fast as they came up. There are forty thousand
of us Skreli alone, remember, without all the other tribes. If a Turkish
army came in here, depend upon it, it would never get out again.”

“And is there likely to be a rising against the Turks?” I inquired, much
interested.

“Why, of course. The revolt will come one day ere long—when we are
ready. We can, however, afford to wait at present. Turkey will soon have
her hands full with Bulgaria and Macedonia, and then—well, we shall help
Bulgaria, and in a week there won’t be a Turk in Skodra.”

“You mean there will be a massacre?”

For answer he shrugged his shoulders.

“And after the revolution?”

“After we have driven out the Turk we hope to obtain our independence
under either France or some other far-off country—England, for instance.
Austria and Italy are, through their priests, conducting a strenuous
propaganda all through Northern Albania—so strenuous as to be
ridiculous. They foolishly think that we are like children, and that we
do not discern their ulterior motives. Oh, it is very amusing, I can
tell you! We accept their schools and their money, and put our fingers
in our cheeks, for we don’t intend to have anything to do with either
Power when the rising comes. We will help Servia or Bulgaria, or even
Montenegro, to drive the Turk from Albania, but we will not lift a
finger for either Italy or Austria. The secret agents of both Powers are
always endeavouring to penetrate here among us and carry on their
propaganda. But we do not want them, and will not have them. More than
one has of late—disappeared.”

“Shot?”

He smiled in the affirmative.

“It is true,” he said, “that we kill—and kill often—for the vendetta—for
espionage—and in the frontier disputes with Montenegro. Alas! we have
here but little of the _bessa_ (truce). But you must remember we are not
like you English. The people have no government, except myself. I make
the law, and they obey. We are Christians. We believe in God and in the
Virgin, and soon we will drive the Mohammedan fanatics from our land.”

He spoke with an air of conviction, and, judging from my observations
while I was guest of his tribe, I believe that when war between Turkey
and Bulgaria comes—as it must come one day before long—these wild people
will sweep down upon the Turks and play frightful havoc with them.

Skodra is often alarmed, and the people retire into their houses and bar
their doors because the tribes are believed to be coming. One day they
will come, and when they do those open drains in the streets will run
with blood. The sign of the cross upon the Christian houses is in
preparation for the day of vengeance.

My walks with Vatt Marashi, though often very fatiguing, were full of
interest. He was never tired of making inquiries regarding England and
England’s power. Did the Sultan recognise England as an independent
state, and did we send an Ambassador to the Sublime Porte, like Austria
and Germany? He knew that England once had a Vice-Consul in Skodra—but
he committed suicide, it was said, poor fellow.

Nothing very extraordinary, I remarked inwardly. Doomed to live in such
an out-of-the-world place as Skodra would be sufficient to drive any
European to take his life. Of brigandage, Vatt Marashi told me that they
held up but few travellers nowadays, and only, indeed, when there was
necessity. Yet a year or two ago they held the worst reputation of any
of the tribes.

One day while we were climbing the rocks—for Vatt and his bodyguard
thought that they might get a shot at a bear—there was a sudden alarm.
The hawk’s eyes of my companions espied strangers, and a sudden halt was
called. In a moment we were all under cover of the rocks. Every man
unslung his rifle, and Vatt himself, with knit brows, drew his big
pistol with silver butt, while I crouched behind a rock with my rifle
ready, expecting something to happen.

Nothing, however, did happen, for a few moments later there were shouts
from the opposite side of the defile, answered by my companions, who
came forth and waved their rifles over their heads as sign of greeting.

Vatt, replacing his pistol in his belt, spoke in a loud, sharp voice,
and received an answer. Those mountaineers can throw their voices long
distances, and be heard distinctly, a fact I often noticed.

Then Palok told me that the strangers were of the neighbouring tribe,
the Kastrati, and that their chief, Dêd Presci, had come to pay Vatt a
visit.

For me this was fortunate, for it gave me an opportunity of meeting the
other ruler of Northern Albania; for next to the Skreli the Kastrati are
most powerful in the Accursed Mountains.

[Illustration: MRIKA, the woman who carried on the blood-feud.]

Half an hour later we met our visitors. Dressed very similarly to my
companions, they wore white tassel-less fezes instead of the little
white skullcap, and the black stripes down their trousers were somewhat
different. The two chieftains touched foreheads, and I was afterwards
introduced. Dêd Presci, a round-faced, pleasant man, rather stout and
burly, his hair cut in mediæval style, gripped me warmly by the hand,
saying—

“I heard that you were in Skodra during the _festà_. Some of my men told
me there was an Englishman. But I never expected to meet you. Perhaps
you are coming across to see me—eh? If so, you are quite welcome.”

“I may come next year to shoot, with a couple of English friends. May I
visit you then?”

“Most certainly. You have only to warn me of your coming through one of
our men down in Skodra, and I will give you safe escort,” was his reply.
“If you are fond of sport, you will find plenty with us. Only bring a
tent, and perhaps some provisions; for our food is not what you
foreigners are used to.”

“Then I shall return one day before long,” I promised.

“Do. You need fear nothing, you know. We never betray a friend.”

“Or forgive an enemy,” added Vatt, laughing.

“Especially if he be a Turk,” I remarked; whereat both chiefs laughed in
chorus.

That evening I ate with the pair in a small lonely house on the
mountainside, and the moon had long risen before Palok and I returned to
Lûk’s.

My photographic camera was, from the first, regarded with a good deal of
suspicion, and it was with very great difficulty I persuaded anybody to
have his picture taken. Many surreptitious snap-shots I took with a
small “Brownie” camera, for unfortunately I had run out of films for my
own larger Kodak. But I was able to secure some photographs, which now
appear in this volume.

Early one morning, soon after sunrise, I was walking with Lûk and Palok
when a young woman passed us.

“That is Mrika Kol Marashut,” Lûk remarked.

“And who is she?” I asked.

“Mrika—the woman who carried on the blood-feud,” was his answer. “Two
years ago she was the most beautiful girl of our tribe, and had a dozen
men ready to marry her. She married Lez, a smart young man from the
Pulati side, and one of the _Baryaktar’s_ bodyguard, like myself. A
month after their marriage Lez was treacherously killed by his brother,
who lived down by the White Drin, and was violently in love with her.
When she received the news she became half demented by grief. But, by
slow degrees, she formed her plans for the blood-feud, and having no
male relatives, resolved to take it on herself. She therefore left us
and was absent nearly a year, during which time she persistently
followed her brother-in-law first to Ochrida, in Macedonia, then to
Skopia, Prisrend, and many other places, always awaiting her opportunity
to strike the blow. This came one afternoon when her husband’s assassin
was walking in the main street in Skodra, and she took Lez’s pistol from
her belt and blew his face away. It was valiant of a woman—was it not?
But not only that,” he went on. “Having killed the murderer, she went
straight to his parents’ house, three days’ journey, and shot them both
dead. Since then she has been back with us, for poor Lez’s death has
been avenged. I was sorry he died,” he added regretfully, “for he was
one of my dearest friends.”

Murder is hardly a crime in Albania, for life is cheap—very cheap. An
enemy or a stranger is shot like a dog, and left at the roadside.

Palok told me of an incident which truly illustrates the utter disregard
the Albanian has for other people’s lives. He was once with a man of the
Hoti—on the Montenegrin frontier—who had just obtained a new rifle,
probably from a murdered Turkish soldier. While he was inspecting it a
man passed close by, a stranger, whereupon the man with the new gun
raised it to his shoulder, took aim, and fired. The stranger fell dead.
Palok remonstrated, but his companion merely said that he was testing
his gun’s accuracy. Was it not better, he asked, to test it that way,
instead of waiting till face to face with an enemy?

The assassin is never punished, except by those who take up the
blood-feud. If the murder takes place in a town the guilty one escapes
to the mountains, or gets away into Macedonia, or into Servia, where he
earns his living by sawing firewood. Every few years the Sultan issues
an irade “for the pacification of the blood,” as it is put, and the
murderer then returns. He pays a small tax to the Turkish Government,
after which he cannot be arrested; and if he pays about three hundred
crowns to the relatives of his victim, the blood-feud is at an end.

This, of course, does not apply to the mountain tribes. They care not a
jot for the Sultan or for his irades. There is no law—save that of the
blood-feud, the vendetta falling upon the murderer and upon his next
male relative. Many were the curious facts regarding the blood-feud and
the Albanian laws of hospitality told to me.

A case in point was that of a young man named Kol, a friend of Lûk’s, a
tall, wiry youth, of somewhat sinister expression—a typical bandit out
of a book-illustration.

I was talking to Lûk about the hospitality extended by the various
tribes to each other when Kol passed, and he beckoned him, saying—

“He has just had a curious experience in the Klementi country. Let him
relate it to you.”

So at Palok’s invitation the young fellow accepted one of my cigarettes,
placed his rifle against the wall, and flung himself down upon a small
boulder near us.

He blew a cloud of smoke from his lips, stroked his knees with his
hands, and looked at me with considerable curiosity, wondering why I
should want to know his story.

“The stranger is interested in your adventures with the Klementi. Tell
him all about them.”

“Bah!” he said, with a slight shrug of the shoulders. “It was
nothing—mere chance—luck, if you like to call it so. There is nothing to
tell.”

“But what there is interests the Englishman. He is the _Baryaktar’s_
guest, remember,” Lûk remarked.

“Well,” said the young man reluctantly, “I was in blood-feud with a man
of the Klementi, and went over there to kill him. I laid in wait one
evening, and as he drove home his sheep I shot him from behind a rock.
He had killed my father, therefore I had a just right to avenge his
blood. My shot, however, aroused the whole valley, and I knew that I,
the only stranger, would be suspected and killed. Therefore I sped away
down the valley in the darkness till I reached a poor little house. An
old woman was there, and I craved food and shelter for the night. She
gave me food at once—for, like ourselves, the Klementi never send a
stranger empty away. I was hungry, for I had crossed into the Klementi
region in secret, and dared not seek food lest my presence became known
to the man I intended to kill.

“Scarcely had I eaten the meat the old woman had given me when there
came the sound of voices outside, and to my horror I saw four men
carrying the body of my victim.

“‘See!’ they cried to the woman who was befriending me. ‘One of the
Skreli has killed your son!’

“Then I knew that it was the murdered man’s mother who had given me
shelter. A moment later the men, among whom was the elder brother of the
victim, discovered me.

“‘See!’ they cried. ‘There is your son’s murderer. We will kill him!’

“I stood with my back to the wall, knowing well that my last moment had
come. The dead man’s brother raised his rifle while I drew my pistol,
prepared at least to fire once more before I died. I was caught like a
rat in a trap!

“The old woman, however, seeing my position and my helplessness, cried—

“‘No. Though he has killed your brother, you may not touch him. He is
beneath our roof; he has eaten our bread, and our protection must remain
over him till to-morrow’s sunset. Remember, my son. It is our law.’

“The man dropped his rifle, and his friends drew back at the old woman’s
reproof.

“‘Go!’ she said to me, after glancing at her son’s body. ‘You have eaten
our bread, and therefore you cannot be harmed.’

“‘Yes, go,’ added my victim’s brother. ‘Till to-morrow’s sundown I will
not follow. But after that, I shall track you down, and, before Heaven,
I will kill you.’

“Need I say that I took up my rifle, and leaving the house travelled
quickly all night and all next day, until I returned here? But,” added
Kol, with a slight sigh, “we shall meet one day—and he will most
certainly kill me.”

Is there any other country in the world where such a code of honour
exists? I am inclined to think not.

Had I been in the midst of a highly civilised people—a foreigner
wandering in the wilds of Yorkshire, for example—I certainly should
never have received the many charming kindnesses that I did at the hands
of those rough, uncivilised tribes. Climbing like cats up the
mountainsides as they did, I was often compelled to lag behind, being
unused to such walking. But, laughing merrily, those armed banditti
would take me by the arms and help me up the steeper places; they would
roll cigarettes for me, carry my rifle when I grew fagged, and fetch and
carry for me like children.

My neat Smith-Wesson hammerless revolver was constantly admired, as
being a much more handy and serviceable weapon than their own big
pistols—Austrian-made revolvers fitted to antique silver butts that had
once done service to flintlocks. My Browning repeating revolver, with
its magazine holding eight cartridges, was declared a marvel of
ingenuity, and on many occasions Vatt and his men amused themselves by
firing with it at targets.

Once he remarked, with a grim smile, that it would be a handy weapon
against the Turks. Where could he get one? Was it costly?

And when I promised to send him one through our mutual friend in the
bazaar down in Skodra, as souvenir of my visit, his joy knew no bounds.

A month later I fulfilled my promise, sending it across from Sofia, and
have since received an acknowledgment of its safe receipt.

I wonder whether he has yet used it against the hated Turk? Whether or
not, he no doubt struts about with it in his belt, a greater chief than
all the others, because he possesses the very latest and deadliest of
weapons.

When one evening I told my host that I had still a long way to
go—through Bosnia, Herzegovina, Servia, Bulgaria, Roumania, and
Macedonia—and that I must bid him farewell, his face fell. He seemed to
genuinely regret.

“But you will return soon,” he urged. “You will redeem your promise, and
bring your friends to shoot. Bring that friend you told me about who
shoots tigers in India. I want to see what sort of shot he is. And the
friend who shoots partridges and pheasants.”

I promised that I would go back to him before long.

“Remember, there will be no danger—none. Tell your friends that Vatt
invites them, and that they are free to go anywhere—anywhere,” he said,
waving his hand over the wild panorama of mountain and valley that is
his indisputable domain.

Next day I rose, packed my small belongings, and with a little present
to Lûk and to his pretty wife prepared to leave, when, judge my
amazement to find Vatt and his bodyguard outside, and to hear that the
chief had decided to accompany me right down to Skodra!

This indeed he did, and when we arrived in the town held by the Turks he
strutted down the main street with me, apparently proud of his guest,
and in open defiance of the scowling ragged soldiers in dirty red fezes.

Though a deadly enemy of the Turks, he openly defied them. As we walked
along the streets there came close behind us twenty of his faithful
followers, armed to the teeth and carrying their rifles ready loaded in
case of trouble.

But there was no trouble. The Turks of Skodra are wise enough to let the
Skreli severely alone.

Trouble will, however, come one day before long, and then alas for the
subjects of the Sultan. The Albanians will avenge the blood of the
Christians now spilt daily in Macedonia, and the Turk will be driven
back southward—or at least what is left of him.

[Illustration: My Body-guard in Northern Albania.]

I parted from Vatt at the door of my so-called _albergo_. He took a
glass of _rakhi_ with me, and afterwards, with a hearty hand-grip, he
told me not to forget my promise to return. Then he left me, stalking at
the head of his armed band, who one and all wished me _bon voyage_, and
he went down the street on his return to his mountain home.

But the irony of Fate followed. A fortnight later I found myself riding
with a strong military escort on the other side of the mountains, where
I had been so hospitably entertained—along the frontier of the Skreli
country.

It was growing dusk, and we were passing through a deep ravine, our
horses stumbling at every step, when of a sudden the crack of a rifle
startled us.

Next instant a dozen rifles flashed fire in the deep shadows to our
left. The Skreli outposts were sniping at us!

In a moment we had all dismounted and sought cover, and for fully ten
minutes returned their fire vigorously, while the officer of the escort
kept up a volley of imprecations on the heads of my late hosts, who
were, of course, in ignorance that they were firing upon “the
Englishman.” We were too far off each other to do much harm, therefore
we simply blazed away. I was crouched behind a rock with the muzzle of
my rifle poked through a convenient crack, and fired towards the spot
where the flashes showed.

A good deal of powder and bad language were expended, until at last our
friends on the other side of the valley, apparently thinking we were too
far away, ceased firing, and we of course did the same.

It was a mutual truce. For ten minutes longer we waited in order to see
what would happen. Then, leading our horses, we crept carefully along on
our way northward, out of the range of our friends’ guns.

Those moments were exciting, however, while they lasted, yet they were
not without their grim humour.




                         BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA




                               CHAPTER I
                            SOME REVELATIONS

Through Dalmatia to Herzegovina—Over the Balkan watershed—Bosnia and
    Sarayevo—A half-Turkish, half-Servian town—Austrian persecution of
    the Christians—Some astounding facts—A land of spies and
    scandals—The police as murderers—A disgrace to European
    civilisation.


In the darkest hour before daylight I bade farewell to my friend Mr.
Charles des Graz, the British Chargé d’Affaires in Cettinje, and
mounting into the pair-horse carriage, left the Montenegrin capital to
descend that most wonderfully engineered road over the face of the bare
mountains to Cattaro, on my way to Herzegovina and Bosnia.

Though still dark, Cettinje was already stirring, and as I drove through
the long main street, armed men who were my friends saluted me, and
shouted “_S’bogom!_” My driver and myself were armed too, in case of
“accident,” yet the Montenegrin roads are quite safe nowadays, thanks to
the pacific and beneficent rule of His Royal Highness Prince Nicholas.

Our eight-hour journey through the mountains was full of interest. Over
those bare, tumbled limestone rocks, devoid of herbage and wild to the
extremity of desolation, came the first rosy flush of dawn, and as we
watched, the sun gradually dispelled the greys into yellows and golds in
all the glory of the bursting of an autumn day. First, over the great
plateau on which Cettinje is situated; then up the bare face of the
mountain in a series of zigzags with acute angles; up, higher and
higher, where the wind cut one’s face like a knife; and higher still,
where we got out to walk, and so lighten the horses and warm ourselves.
I gave my driver a pull at my flask, for the temperature was below zero,
and we were both cramped and cold. Even through my leather-lined
motor-coat the wind cut like a knife, chilling me to the bone.

At the summit a glorious view, one more wonderful, perhaps, than any in
the whole of the Balkans. On the one side in the far blue distance the
Accursed Mountains of Albania, where dwelt my friend Vatt Marashi and
his fearless men, and on the other, away down in the rolling mists, lay
what looked like a series of lakes, but which in reality was the
wandering arm of the Adriatic, the magnificent fjord called the Mouths
of Cattaro—the Bocche di Cattaro.

Here we struck the single telegraph-wire which places remote Cettinje in
connection with the rest of the civilised world, and then the pace of
our rough mountain horses showed that we were descending. Far below were
a number of scattered houses, the little town of Nyegush, the chief
edifice of which is the unpretentious palace of the Prince, and for a
full hour and a half we wound down and down ere we reached its main
street and pulled up at the inn for half an hour to get some coffee and
to rest the horses.

Cramped and half-frozen as I was, the big steaming bowl of coffee was
indeed welcome. Then, after scribbling some postcards to friends in
England, I went for a brisk walk, took a photograph or two, and
returned, just as the horses were being reharnessed.

Down again, ever down, past a great dark cavern, and on until we came to
the row of stone slabs set in the road that marks the frontier between
gallant little Montenegro and her enemy Austria. And then, what a view!
Surely the most superb in all Europe!

Our old familiar tourist-Switzerland, the toy-Tyrol, the Norwegian
fjords, the trumpery-Apennines, and the high Balkans are full of
magnificent scenery, but for a picturesque combination of blue sea and
sheer bare mountain nothing that I have ever seen—and I have knocked
about Europe, I believe, as much as most men—equals that view from the
Montenegrin road.

[Illustration: Bunaquelle: Bosnia.]

[Illustration: Jajace: Bosnia.]

All is beautiful—all save that frowning fortress which the Austrians
have lately constructed to command the road, and which it is strictly
forbidden to photograph under pain of imprisonment as a spy. I, however,
risked it, and took another picture, which turned out rather well.

In Cattaro, being the bearer of despatches for His Britannic Majesty’s
Foreign Office in London, and being therefore armed with a
_laisser-passer_, my baggage was not examined, and at one o’clock I
again boarded the same steamer which had brought me from Trieste, the
_Graf Wurmbrand_, bound for Gravosa—which is the port for Ragusa, in
Dalmatia.

Ragusa I found a quaint, mediæval place, reminding me strongly of one of
those old towns on the Italian Riviera—I mean those unfashionable ones,
at which the train stops and nobody gets out—ones that you only visit if
you are motoring from Monte Carlo along to Genoa. It is a town of
ponderous walls, of narrow streets, and queer dark byways. Across its
dry moat and through its ancient gateway carriages do not pass, and as
soon as you are in the main street you are out of it again, and passing
through a water-gate are upon a small quay.

Difficult it is to realise that this quiet, old-world town, where
everyone speaks Italian, was once the great port of the Balkan
hinterland in the days when Venice was Queen of the Seas. And yet to the
antiquary it is pleasant to stroll in and out of the old
sixteenth-century churches, the Rector’s Palace, and the rest, to
examine the mediæval Onofrio fountain, and to spend a day, as I did,
among the architectural relics of an age bygone and long forgotten.

While there it rained for the first time after the long dry season. And
if you have ever been in Italy—or anywhere, indeed—in the extreme south
of Europe on the first day of the rainy season, you will know what I
mean when I say it was not a mere shower. Water came down in sheets, and
for a whole day and a whole night it never ceased, while the lightning
flashed and the thunder crashed and echoed in the chain of mountains
behind the town.

Palms and oranges grow in profusion in Ragusa, while across on the
beautiful island of Lacroma—which legend connects with Richard Cœur
de Lion—is vegetation more luxuriant than even upon the French Riviera.
Prince Mirko of Montenegro, Colonel Constantinovitch, his father-in-law,
and a number of wealthy people, mostly Austrians, have fine winter
villas outside the town, and life there in spring is said to be quite
charming.

Many yachts call there during the season, and there is opera at frequent
intervals. Zara, Spalato, and Lussinpiccolo are all favourite winter
resorts of the Austrians and Hungarians, but none is so smart or so
select as Ragusa, which, by the way, has its hotel, the Imperial, where
the charges equal, if not quite eclipse, those of the best hotels at
Nice or Monte Carlo, while the cooking is inferior.

For the owner of a pretty villa overlooking the sea who desires to spend
a quiet, healthful winter, Ragusa may be pleasant, but I confess it
struck me as a particularly dull little town—a place so full of faded
glory as to be painful.

The journey from Gravosa across Dalmatia, Herzegovina, Bosnia, and
Hungary to Servia I found tedious, though mostly through fine wild
mountain scenery. I performed it partly by road and partly by rail,
making Mostar and Sarayevo—the Bosnian capital—my halting-places.

The rail, a narrow-gauge one with a single train a day, starts from
Gravosa at five o’clock in the morning and first ascends the Ombla
valley from the sea. Gradually it rises in a series of zigzags over the
grey bare rocks and through many tunnels for sixty miles to Gabela, a
little mountain town, and then through the dry beds of a series of great
lakes, and across barren plateaux until it descends into the valley of
the Narenta, which narrows into a series of dark, romantic defiles,
while the mountains grow higher and more wild, until Mostar, the capital
of Herzegovina, is reached.

Mostar is a rather dull little town on the Narenta, still half-Turkish,
with its mosques and bazaar where one can obtain inlaid silver work from
Livino. But there was certainly nothing to attract, so I pushed on next
day to Sarayevo. Between the two capitals the scenery is superb, indeed
some of the grandest in the whole of the Balkans. Through the Great
Defile, or Gorge of the Narenta, the train slowly wends its sinuous
course beneath the high precipices of Velez, and then through the Prenj
Mountains, across the Glogosnica valley to the small garrison town of
Jablanica, a lonely little place in a very wild district.

Twenty miles farther on we came to Konjica, a picturesque little place
with a fine old Turkish bridge spanning the Narenta, where the train
halts, affording us time to explore the place and take a photograph or
two. Then the ascent is so steep that the puffing little locomotive is
fitted with cog-wheels to take us through the Trescanica valley up over
the ridge of the wild Ivan Planina, the high watershed between the Black
Sea and the Adriatic.

Progress is slow and halts are frequent. In places there have been
landslips, and we creep along the edges of dangerous precipices. But the
scenery fully compensates for the many tedious hours and for lack of
food—for in our ignorance I had omitted to lay in stores, and the only
thing I could obtain during the day was half a dozen apples! The Bosnian
frontier crossed, the train traverses the saddle of Vilovac, then
descends rapidly through beautiful wooded valleys and along the Bosna
and Zeljeznica rivers, until, in the darkness, Sarayevo with its many
electric lamps is reached—a railway journey even more interesting than
the well-known Gothard route.

My fellow-passengers from Mostar were two. One was a Turkish gentleman
who removed his slippers and sat cross-legged on the seat fingering his
beads until the sundown, when he produced some sandwiches from the tail
of his frock-coat, and slowly consumed them after his long fast since
four o’clock that morning. The other was a particularly communicative
Austrian gentleman, whom I recognised at once to be a spy.

Sarayevo, the Bosnian capital, is very Eastern, and, being so, is full
of attraction for the stranger. There is a very fair old-fashioned
hotel, the Europa, in the centre of the town, nearly two miles from the
station. It is a city of mosques, the minarets of which were all gaily
illuminated on the night of my arrival, producing a picturesque effect
against the night-sky.

The place is prettily situated—a town of some forty thousand
inhabitants, half Serb, half Eastern. Lying in the narrow valley, whence
the river Milyacka bursts forth from a gorge just above the town, the
dwellers by the riverside are mostly Austrian immigrants, while the
natives have their houses and their mosques on the hillside. Every house
has its own little garden, as in Servia, and of course the bazaar is the
centre of trade, as in every town where the beslippered Turk still
remains.

This _charshiya_, or bazaar, is a great labyrinth of dark, narrow,
ill-paved alleys flanked with booths, where every trade, each with its
particular quarter, is carried on in open view to the passers-by. The
copper ware, silver filigree, and carpets are attractive, but most of
the so-called Oriental goods are “fakes.” The place, though there is a
variety of costume everywhere, is not half so attractive as Skodra,
because of the Austrian bogey that pervades everything.

To buy specimens of Bosnian chiselled metal work it is best to go to the
Government School of Industrial Art, where the finest pieces of
workmanship may be seen in course of execution, and where the price
asked is a fixed one, below that demanded either in the bazaar or in
shops. The services for Turkish coffee in chiselled copper-gilt are of
chaste and very elegant design, perfect marvels of patience in
chiselling, and very appreciable to the Western taste in decorative art.

The chief feature of the bazaar is the Husref Beg Mosque, the finest in
the town, to which, though an Infidel, I was granted admission. I of
course put on overshoes, and made an interesting tour round with a
priest who only spoke Turkish, so that I did not learn very much from
him. Built about 1540, it is a fine spacious structure, with dome and
high minarets, and in front, in the quiet old courtyard, is a fine old
fountain for ablutions shaded by a very ancient lime tree. Before it,
sit several Turkish pedlars in turbans selling rosaries, printed texts
from the Koran, imitation otto-of-rose manufactured from geranium,
European collar-studs, and other trifles.

Another industry peculiar to Bosnia is the inlay of gold and silver into
bog-oak, or gun-metal, and many quaint little objects—boxes, bracelets,
brooches, and belt-buckles—quite unique in England, may be purchased.
The old silver filigree buttons displayed everywhere may also be used
with advantage by ladies for hat-pins.

A stroll through the town shows at once the mixed character of the
people, for all the names of streets are written up in three
languages—Turkish, Croatian, and Serb. The noisy thoroughfares are
crowded with Europeans, mixed up with baggy-legged men and veiled women,
men in fezes in all stages of disintegration, while the Bosnian ladies
wear the queerest head-gear I have ever set eyes upon. The hair is
parted in the middle and brushed down straight, while upon it is stuck a
tiny pork-pie cap of gaudy-coloured chintz or silk, edged with a
thousand gilt sequins sewn closely together, the most ugly and most
unbecoming head-dress imaginable. Yet it is evidently the _mode_, and is
worn by European ladies in all other respects attired as one would find
them in Vienna or in Budapest.

But this is Bosnia, and assuredly strange things happen here under the
unjust rule of Austria.

Strangers seldom come to Sarayevo. In the heart of that mountainous
region between the Save and the Adriatic, only approached from the south
by that rack-and-pinion railway, or from the north by the one train a
day from that un-get-at-able station in Slavonia, Bosnche-Brod, it is
entirely shut away from European influence—or European eyes, for the
matter of that—and quite off the track taken by strangers in the
Balkans.

Indeed, I would never advise the intending traveller to take that route
from Ragusa to Belgrade. Better by far take the steamer right up the
Adriatic to Fiume, and thence by rail, as it is quicker, and much less
fatiguing. I did not go to Bosnia, however, so much to see its capital
as to obtain some idea of the present system of government there, and to
hear from the lips of the people themselves the advantages, or
disadvantages, of the rule of His Majesty the Emperor Francis Josef.

With many well-known men in Sarayevo I talked. I heard both sides.
But I am bound to admit that some of the facts proved to me were
utterly amazing, showing how ill and unjustly governed is both
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I had read André Barre’s recent book, _La
Bosnie-Herzegovina_, and had doubted the very serious and direct
charges which he brings against the Austrian Administration.

Therefore I went to see for myself, to make inquiry, and to thoroughly
investigate.

The opinion I formed, after analysing the many facts placed before me,
is that the present oppressed state of Bosnia is surely a vivid
object-lesson to Servia, where day by day Austria is endeavouring, by
the most ingenious and unscrupulous forms of intrigue, to obtain a
footing. This latter I will explain more fully in my chapters on the
future of Servia. Suffice it here to say that poor struggling Bosnia is
to-day helpless beneath the talons of the Austrian eagle, and that the
administration is a shameful travesty of civilised rule.

The Serb population are more essentially the sufferers, and have been so
ever since the Austrian occupation allowed by the Treaty of Berlin.
Through the four centuries of the Turkish rule, the Christians were from
time to time oppressed, and in return revolted, more particularly in
1850 and 1875; but the position of the Serbs to-day is very little
better, if any, than it was before the Russo-Turkish War.

Indeed, it seems that the whole policy of Austria in Bosnia has been
directed against the Servian Orthodox people. The Servian Mohammedans
are not feared because of their ignorance, while their fatalism renders
them docile. On the contrary, however, the local Government of Bosnia
fears those professing the Orthodox faith, and, having established the
Jesuits solidly in the country, have proceeded upon a course of
systematic persecution. Austrian methods are too apparent all over the
Balkans. Unscrupulous to a degree, her policy in Bosnia has been one of
terror, of espionage, of famine, and of assassination. In truth it is
accomplishing the moral and material ruin of a splendid country, the
crushing of the noble Servian race which has, alas! fallen beneath its
hand.

At first I was inclined to doubt. The Serb is a patriot, sometimes given
to exaggeration. But very quickly, as the result of my inquiries,
evidences of Austria’s evil rule were apparent on every hand. To go into
a mass of detail is not within the province of this record of inquiry,
neither do I wish to scream hysterical condemnations. I went to the
Balkans, not for sight-seeing, but seeking to penetrate some of the
mysteries of their politics, and their aims for the future. I travelled
there in order to have audiences with the Kings, Princes, and Cabinet
Ministers of the various countries in the Peninsula. These were granted
me, and thus I obtained, at first hand, their views regarding the
present situation, and their hopes and aspirations.

In Bosnia, both on the Mohammedan and Christian side, I found only a
grave and grim story of misrule and oppression, which it may be well to
briefly outline, in order to show how Austria rules the unfortunate
country that falls beneath her dominion.

Under Austria, the Servian Orthodox Church is treated in a manner
utterly inconceivable in this enlightened century. Neither trouble nor
intrigue has been spared to separate the people from the Church. The
metropolitans nominated by the Emperor have been alienated from the
people, with the result that at Mostar the head of the Church is the
object of unanimous derision. No one will attend his church if he is
present, and on passing him in the streets they turn their heads or
hiss. Again, in Sarayevo the metropolitan is regarded with equal
disfavour. The old people refuse to receive the communion at his hands,
and each day upon the walls of his house are posted insulting placards.
To those who know the veneration with which the Serbs regard their
metropolitans, such signs as these show the general demoralisation
brought about by intrigue and the circulation of base calumnies. Not
only are the people encouraged to treat the heads of the Church with
contempt, but they are taught to hate the priests and to scoff at
religion. And this by an Empire which has the miserable effrontery to
call itself Christian!

Again, Saint Sava is, as is well known, the patron saint of the Servian
Church. He is considered the protector of churches and schools, and all
new churches in Bosnia and Herzegovina adopt for their _slava_, or
festival, the day consecrated to Saint Sava, January 14 (O.S.). This day
the Orthodox Serbs everywhere regard as a feast. In the morning there is
a solemn service, and in the evening the young people assemble to sing
national songs and dance national dances. But even this has been
disapproved of by Austria, who regards the feast as preserving the
national conscience. The Government commenced by prohibiting the second
portion of the fête, and then gradually suppressing the first. Pressed
by the authorities, the priests each 14th of January are suddenly taken
so ill that they cannot perform the service, or else they are
unavoidably absent from home on that day, so that no _slava_ can take
place. In this oppressed country every programme of a fête, no matter
what, must first pass the censor, who prohibits the singing of the old
Servian songs, and places a penalty upon anyone singing the “Hymn of
Saint Sava,” which is purely a religious one. Again, in many cases the
reply of the censor will arrive eight or ten days after the date of the
festival. Indeed, in many places, the _slava_ of private families—the
domestic name-day feast which, to the Servian, surpasses in interest
either Christmas or Easter—has actually been prohibited by the very
enlightened local authorities! This happened in the arrondissement of
Rielinski quite recently.

Of the history of the struggle of the Orthodox Church in Bosnia, or of
the strenuous Catholic propaganda, it is unnecessary to speak. Let us
deal with the present deplorable state of affairs, and with the future.
Woe-betide any heard singing the patriotic song of the Prince of
Montenegro, “Onamo ... Onamo,” for he will be punished severely. Spies
are on every hand, and no man knows at any moment when he may be thrown
into prison upon some fictitious charge. Austria, indeed, is
endeavouring to civilise and subject Bosnia by continued oppression, and
nowhere is this more apparent than in the Press. Like in Russia, every
word is subjected to the censor before printed. One buys the
_Musavat_—the organ of the Serb Mohammedans in Herzegovina, printed at
Mostar—and finds every paragraph bearing a number. There are many
numbers with the spaces blank—suppressed altogether. Again, in the
_Servian Word_, the organ of the Servian Orthodox in Bosnia, one finds
the same thing—numbers and blanks.

This is not, perhaps, surprising when practically every organ of the
Press is prohibited save the Government publications, of which the
_Bosniak_—an amusing journal fabricated by amateur journalistic
functionaries of the State—is a good example.

Among the hundred and four journals prohibited are most of the Servian
newspapers, even commercial, religious, and literary reviews; a number
of Hungarian journals, including the _Dubrovnik_ of Ragusa; every
Russian journal of whatever kind or description; and last, but surely
not least, the _Comments upon the Evangelists_ by the Metropolitan
Firmilien!

Every book or newspaper entering Bosnia or Herzegovina goes through the
censor’s office, while the postal employés note, and hand to the police,
the names and addresses of the receivers of prohibited publications. So
it is not only in Russia and Turkey where one cannot read a foreign
journal, but here, under the enlightened rule of His Majesty the Emperor
Francis Josef.

Bosnia is, truth to tell, an unknown land as far as the rest of Europe
is concerned, and probably these facts may come as a complete surprise
to English readers, who are apt to regard Austria as a Christian and
progressive Power, instead of what she is, the Ogre of the Balkans.

To the injustices inflicted upon the peasantry, to their many grievances
and their violated rights, I have not space here to refer. Under such
rule as pertains, the wretched condition of the Serbs in the rural
districts may well be imagined. As André Barre has truly said, “Austria
entered Bosnia and Herzegovina, not for the purposes of reform, nor to
civilise, but to satisfy a political desire, a military ambition to
triumph over a people by slowly and methodically exterminating them.”

“J’ai mis le pied sur la tête du serpent,” said Count Andrassy, speaking
to Lord Salisbury after the signature of the Treaty of Berlin. And those
words give to-day the key to the Austrian policy. She seeks to crush the
Serbs, not only in Bosnia, but in the kingdom of Servia itself, and to
Germanise the whole land by steel and by hunger. And such is the present
pitiable situation—a situation unrealised in England—a situation which
has actually called forth the hostile criticism of the Vienna journals
themselves—including the semi-official _Neue Freie Presse_—against the
present barbarism of the occupation.

Any industry or commerce exploited by Serbs is at once crushed and
ruined, while in the police we have vivid examples of corrupt
maladministration only equalled in Russia. The police persecutions are
scandalous. Many were related to me by persons who had themselves been
victims. The Bosnian citizen beneath the claws of the police is utterly
without defence. If the paternal Government of Austria attempt to deny
this, let the recent cases of M. Gligorie Jeftanovitch of Sarayevo, M.
Chola of Mostar, M. Stiepo Srchkitch, M. Ilia Duckovitch, M. Risto
Maximovitch, M. Radoulovitch, M. Nikolas Pichkakutch of Banja-Louka, and
the sad affair of Pierre Dorliatcha of Bosnia-Novi, amid a thousand
others, be cited, to show what travesties of justice are performed in
this remote corner of the Balkans. A whole volume, indeed, could be
written upon the corrupt Austrian police methods which vie with those of
Holy Russia. But it must suffice here to cite cases upon which no denial
can be offered by the authorities.

The Austrian authorities, who are so glib with their semi-official
denials and statements, which we see almost daily in the London
newspapers, will have some difficulty in disproving the disgraceful
incident at Sokolatz, near Sarayevo, not long ago. Here, during the
Easter fête, the gendarmes were formed round the church “to maintain
order.” A peasant saw one of the gendarmes endeavouring to outrage a
young woman, and ran to inform the authorities. Whereupon the gendarme
shot the peasant dead with his revolver. There was no inquiry regarding
the murder, though witnessed by at least a hundred persons. And the
official account of the affair—which I have myself seen—actually
declares that the unfortunate peasant died _a natural death_!

This is but one single case of hundreds. All over the country the police
and gendarmes shoot the witnesses of their crimes, and there is never an
inquiry. Of a verity the barbarities of the police in Bosnia are a
disgrace to a nation that calls itself civilised, and cry for reform
quite as loudly as they do in the Land of the Tzar.

Let the reader who doubts this outspoken condemnation of Austrian
administration go to Bosnia and see for himself. He will find that I
have understated the facts, and things will be told him that surely will
stagger belief.




                               CHAPTER II
                       DUST IN THE EYES OF EUROPE

How spies work in Bosnia—Secret agents dog the stranger’s footsteps—My
    own experience—Fighting the spy with his own weapons—To “nobble” the
    foreigner—How an unfavourable book was purchased by the Austrian
    Government—Bribery of Press correspondents—A country worse than
    Russia—Some suggested reforms—The secret policy of Austria in the
    Balkans.


Spies are a necessity to autocratic Governments. Their business is to
prevent the execution of plots, to discover all secrets affecting the
security of the Prince or the State, and to supply information which may
be used with advantage in diplomacy by their employers.

In Bosnia one of the largest items in the national expenditure is the
sum expended upon espionage. Here, however, its character is very
different from that described above. Its agents have no work in
connection with political plots, for the crushed and humiliated people
are far too feeble to conspire against the State. Their nefarious work
is simply to spread intimidation and suspicion among the inhabitants,
and to put them in defiance one against the other—indeed, to promote
disorder, so that the force of Austria may be consolidated upon them.

This secret stirring up of internal strife by Austria is part of her
policy, not only in Bosnia but in Servia and other parts of the Balkans.
In the kingdom of Servia she is especially active to-day. Indeed, her
unscrupulous methods are well illustrated by what occurred on the
assassination of King Alexander and Queen Draga. Instantly after the
assassination Austria mobilised her troops in all the garrisons on the
Servian frontier, at Semlin, Pancsova, and Neusatz, with orders to enter
Servian territory on the first sign of trouble. At the same time there
was sent into Belgrade a perfect army of _agents provocateurs_—police
spies, all of them—who promenaded the town crying to the crowd, “Come
on! Come on! Let us wreck and demolish the Embassy of Austria, the
supporters of the dynasty of Obrenovitch!”

The Servian people, fortunately, hesitated, though they all had good
cause to make a demonstration against their bitterest enemies. Then the
Minister of the Interior intervened, and put military guards at all the
Legations. The agitators were arrested, and at their trial were proved
beyond doubt to be actual agents of Austria, sent there to create
disorder and so allow the Austrian troops to enter Servia!

And as such, with a strong protest to Vienna, they were ignominiously
expelled.

In Sarayevo one half of the population is paid to spy upon the other
half. Ask any man in Bosnia or in Herzegovina his opinion of his
neighbour, and he will tell you to beware of him, as “he is a spy, and
will denounce you to the authorities.” Ask the accused about his
accuser, and he will tell you exactly the same thing. The whole place
simply swarms with secret agents. In the country, peasants are given
cows in payment for information about their neighbours, which is, of
course, very often false. Stories are manufactured for the sake of
reward. Expense is nothing. Agents follow you everywhere—in the town, in
the country, and even beyond the frontier.

Oh yes! Bosnia, with all her natural beauties of scenery, is a truly
delightful place under the present régime. The Government have their
spies in private houses in the guise of domestics—for, by preference,
they employ women and priests. Every pavement in the towns carries a
spy, therefore silence here is certainly golden. The spy system is more
complete and elaborate than either in Russia or in France, and a good
deal more costly—all energies being devoted against the unfortunate
Serbs.

In such an oppressed and persecuted country it goes without saying that
the stranger is well looked after. From the moment I crossed the
frontier of Herzegovina, to the moment I left Slavonia at Zimony, I was
never lost sight of. Perhaps because I was known to be the bearer of
Government despatches, I was suspected of being a British agent in
disguise. My passport was never asked for until I desired to leave
Austrian territory and cross the Save to Belgrade, yet with the
marvellous secret system I was, while in Bosnia, a marked man. Each time
I strolled in the streets of Mostar or of Sarayevo, a spy dogged my
footsteps—sometimes a man, sometimes a woman—and my every movement was
carefully noted.

A gentleman, apparently staying in the hotel and speaking excellent
French, volunteered to be my guide about Sarayevo. He was a pleasant,
nonchalant fellow, and represented himself to be a commercial traveller.
I accepted his kind offices, well knowing him to be a spy, and was
rather amused at the idea of the authorities providing me gratuitously
with such an excellent cicerone. Wherever I went, so also did he. By all
kinds of clever ruses he endeavoured to discover the reason of my visit;
and I, in order to aggravate him, managed to elude his questions and so
increase his suspicions. In my travels in various out-of-the-world
corners of the Continent I have had a wide experience of spies and their
ways, therefore I set myself to puzzle my inquisitive friend by adopting
the self-same methods as he himself was adopting.

This continued for a couple of days, when he gave me up and disappeared.
After that I was watched by two agents, who kept me always under close
surveillance. I was more amused than annoyed, yet I confess I
entertained constant anxiety regarding the confidential despatches that
were in my possession, to be handed over to the King’s Messenger on his
way from Constantinople to London at the earliest moment.

The traveller can only reach Sarayevo from three points: from the north
from Bosnche-Brod or Banja-Louka, and from the south by Metkovitch. The
local authorities of these three places know each traveller who passes,
and to the stranger’s compartment there enters a pleasant person of
engaging manner, who becomes his fellow-traveller, whiles away the
tedious hours, explains the objects of interest along the route, and at
the same time discovers a good deal about the new-comer. The secret
agent will discourse upon the peace of the country, the prosperity of
the people, the impartiality of the administration, and the rapid
strides of progress being made on every hand. Meanwhile, news of the
stranger has been telegraphed to Sarayevo, and when the polite traveller
has parted from the stranger, the latter at once falls under a strict
surveillance, of which he never dreams.

Should you let drop the remark that you have come to Bosnia to study the
conditions of the country, then the attention paid to you will be
prodigious. Kind friends, overflowing with information, will be your
guides everywhere: they will conduct you to visit the authorities; they
will pay for your cabs, give you luncheons at restaurants, and accompany
you of an evening even to the door of your bedroom, until you will think
the country a veritable El Dorado. Strangers who come to study are, of
course, dangerous to the Administration, and therefore are carefully
watched, and treated with unsurpassing generosity. Spies surround him,
and the people, knowing those spies by sight, fear to approach him. In
some cases a peasant or a citizen has approached a stranger and told him
some plain truths—the truths I have learnt and written in these
pages—and for doing so has invariably been sent to prison. These lessons
have borne fruit, for nowadays nothing in the world will induce the
Bosnian peasant to talk to a stranger. He is far too afraid.

If any serious criticism of Bosnian administration is published abroad,
the authorities always seek to immediately purchase and suppress it, and
many are the sums yearly paid in blackmail to unscrupulous writers who,
knowing the truth, threaten to make exposure. I will give a case in
point. Not very long ago there was in Prague published a brochure
severely criticising the Bosnian policy, giving a description of the
maladministration, and pointing out the disastrous state of the
finances. A copy of this fell into the hands of M. Stakievitch, late
director of the administration of the Bosnian local Government, and at
that moment _en congé_. He at once apprised the local Government, who
immediately sent Dr. Berx to Prague, with orders to suppress the
publication of the book at all costs. The Government, after some brief
negotiations, paid the sum of 100,000 florins (200,000 fcs.) for the
destruction of the book and the silence of its author upon the state of
Bosnian finance!

Then on the return of Dr. Berx no fewer than forty functionaries were
arrested on charges of having given information to the author. Is not
this sufficiently significant? Every newspaper in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is well subsidised, and in return is compelled to chant the praises of
the administration of the local Government, while all correspondents of
foreign journals are equally the recipient of money from the State. In
Bosnia the foreign newspaper correspondent lives well and grows fat.

Thus does Austria throw dust in the eyes of Europe.

With religion persecuted, education at a standstill, and the Press
either gagged or suborned, Austria is slowly carrying out her policy of
crushing the Serbs. In Bosnia you have no right to pray, no right to
think; you must blindly obey and laud with flattery the very talons
outstretched to rend you. It is a land where justice is a farce, where
lies are told as truths, where the police persecute and murder, where
the poor are oppressed, where the official grows wealthy, and where no
man is secure from the false denunciation of spies eager for reward.

Should it be permitted in this twentieth century to one European people
to crush another European people under the false pretext of
civilisation? The Bosnians are neither negroes nor red-skins, but a
civilised religious race, part of the great Serb nation, with the same
right to live, the same right to religion, liberty, and to justice as
the canting hypocrites of Vienna themselves. Why should they be
exterminated?

So careful is the local Government of Bosnia not to allow the truth to
leak out that up to the present little has been heard in Europe of the
plain, unvarnished facts I have here put forward. But it is a subject
that will come before the public ere long, and then we shall see if the
Powers will still stand by and allow the destruction of a people who do
not merit the hatred of their master.

[Illustration: Sarayevo: Bosnia.]

[Illustration: In Herzegovina.]

Bosnia and Herzegovina are both rich countries; the soil is productive,
the inhabitants are intelligent and apt in agriculture, industry, and
commerce. The provinces are capable of moral and material expansion, if
such were permitted, and there is no reason why the whole country should
not be peaceable and prosperous.

Save André Barre, scarcely a writer has up to to-day had the courage to
frankly criticise the rule of His Imperial and Royal Majesty the Emperor
of Austria. So carefully are the facts concealed by the local
authorities—who adopt the self-same tactics of Russia before the
uprising—that strangers going to Bosnia see or hear practically nothing,
and what they do see is all rose-tinted. What I have written here is,
however, based upon my own observations, and upon what was told and
proved to me by responsible persons in Mostar and Sarayevo, men who,
living under the persecution of police and Government, risked their
liberty in speaking with me. I have therefore put the facts plainly, in
order that the English reading public may form their own conclusions.

The reforms urgently needed are many.

From the religious point of view, what is required is effective liberty
of conscience, liberty of the cult, and the autonomy of the Serb
Orthodox Church. From the moral point of view, the religions and customs
of the different nationalities in Bosnia should be respected, liberty of
education should be given as well as liberty of speech and liberty of
the Press.

Regarded from an economic point of view, an immediate solution of the
agrarian question is required; a readjustment of the unjust taxes; the
establishment of schools of agriculture, as in Servia and Bulgaria;
liberty of commerce and industry; and the establishment of poor-relief
and poor-houses.

Many reforms are also required in the Administration. The citizens of
the two countries should be eligible for employment in public offices;
the public functionaries should be replaced by a more educated class;
the police force should be purged and diminished; the costly spy system
should be entirely abolished; a less corrupt justice should be
introduced, and economy effected in the present wasted finances.

Yet how can one hope for reforms from a nation like Austria, who is
working daily and unscrupulously to crush and exterminate the
unfortunate Serbs under their rule, with one aim and one policy, namely,
to extend their territory south through Novi-Bazar and Macedonia in
order to obtain the port of Salonica?

Under the Treaty of Berlin the Powers have a right to interfere. If they
would check Austria’s advances southward they should step in at once and
claim, in the name of civilisation and humanity, justice for poor
persecuted Bosnia. If half a dozen African negroes are maltreated by a
Belgian rubber-hunter we throw up our hands in pious horror, lift our
eyes heavenward, the papers are flooded with “atrocities,” often
manufactured, and questions are asked in the House. Yet when we have
here a whole country being vigorously and secretly crushed under our
very noses, by a Power who intends to be one of our rivals in the East,
we turn our heads in the opposite direction. Austria, we say, is a
Christian country, and can do no wrong!

Go to the Balkans, and you will see what I have seen. You will then
realise the clever, subtle influence of Austrian agents in
Montenegro—where they persuade the pride of the country to emigrate,
themselves paying the expenses, and thus sap the nation of its future
population; in Northern Albania, where the priests in Austrian pay never
cease to descant upon the benefits of Austrian rule; in Servia, where
they are ever stirring strife; in Bulgaria, where their spies are ever
active; and in Macedonia, where they secretly encourage the Greek bands
to massacre the Bulgars.

Thus over the whole of the Balkans Austria has spread forth her wings,
and her dark, threatening shadow is now across everything. The Austrian
policy, shown so very plainly to all who travel in the Balkans, is to
compete with Germany and become the paramount Power in the Peninsula,
and obtain Montenegro, Albania, and Macedonia for herself, together with
the much-coveted port of Salonica. From this latter point she already
has a railway—constructed by the late Baron Hirsch—through Usküb, and
joining the main Vienna-Constantinople line at Nisch, in Servia.
Therefore part of the policy is to lay hold of the kingdom of
Servia—though under the present régime there, and with a Government so
firmly established as it is, there is, I think, very little to fear in
this latter. Fortunately, Servia knows how to take care of herself.

Such is the programme of Austria—one of extermination and extension. And
with these facts in view, indisputable to every traveller, surely it is
in the interests of the Powers to remain no longer indifferent to the
state of affairs in Bosnia.

Is it possible that the prophetic words of the Russian delegate
Gortchakoff, speaking at the Berlin Congress, will ever come true, as so
many of his prophecies have done?

He said, “The tomb of Austria is in the Balkans.”

                                 SERVIA




                               CHAPTER I
                         THE TRUTH ABOUT SERVIA

The diplomatic circle in Belgrade—Studying both sides of the Servian
    question—Austrian intrigue—113 known foreign spies in Belgrade!—An
    illustration of the work of secret agents—Quaint Servian
    customs—Pauperism unknown—Servia to-day and to-morrow.


The stranger’s first impression of Belgrade is that it is a rather dull
Russian town.

Coming from Bosnia and Albania, one misses the quaint costumes and the
life and movement in the streets, the fierce men with rifles, and the
veiled shuffling women. The Turk, though he has a mosque here, is
unseen.

At Semlin—or Zimony, as the Hungarians call it—the last town on the
Austrian side of the Save, one’s passport is carefully examined and
registered, not by the Servians, to allow you into the country, but by
the Austrians, to allow you to pass out!

As bearer of despatches for His Britannic Majesty’s Government, I had no
difficulty either with passport or luggage; otherwise, with the Customs
War raging, I might have suffered considerable delay. Crossing the
river, I ere long found myself in comfortable quarters in the Grand
Hotel in Belgrade—comfortable indeed after the rough life and hard fare
in Northern Albania.

My letters of introduction having been presented to the Servian Cabinet
Ministers and members of both political parties, and having called upon
Mr. Beethom Whitehead, the newly appointed British Minister, I quickly
found myself in the centre of a very smart and merry diplomatic circle.

To His Excellency M. Nicholas Pachitch,—the Premier and strongest man in
Servia; to Madame Pachitch; to His Excellency Dr. Milenko Vesnitch,
Minister of Justice; to Madame Vesnitch, an American and one of the most
charming and beautiful ladies in Belgrade; to M. Stoyanovitch, Minister
of Commerce; to Commandant Yossiphovitch, aide-de-camp to His Majesty;
to Colonel Tcholak-Antich, the Royal Marechal; to the Minister of
Finance; to M. Drago Yankovitch of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; to
Mr. Alexander Yovitchitch, late Servian Minister in London; to Colonel
Christich, his wife, an Irish lady, and Miss Annie Christich; to Mr. C.
L. Blakeney of the British Legation; and also to Mr. Beethom Whitehead,
the British Minister, and Mrs. Whitehead, I owe a deep debt of gratitude
for their kindness to me socially, and their invaluable assistance
during my inquiries.

There are but few English in Belgrade—not more than two or three
residents. But at the hotel I was fortunate in finding my friend Mr. A.
M. Tucker, Servian Consul-General in London, who with his wife was in
Belgrade in connection with a financial undertaking. Mr. Tucker is an
official who has rendered many services to the Servian Government.

Moving in the official set, I was soon able to see for myself the social
life in Belgrade, which I found very bright and very entertaining. In
the mornings the streets are filled with well-dressed ladies and gallant
officers, in perhaps the smartest uniforms in Europe. The hour of the
siesta is from one till three, then at five the cafés overflow till
seven. Someone is always giving a dinner or reception, and bridge is
played everywhere; for in no other city in Europe has it “caught on”
more than it has in Belgrade.

The British Legation is, of course, the smartest house among those of
the diplomatists, and that of Madame Vesnitch among the Cabinet
Ministers. French and Italian are the languages spoken in society.

[Illustration:

  24 Octob. 1900 Belgrad.    Nic. P. Pachitch
  Prime Minister of Servia.
]

The city of Belgrade is in a transition state. Already in many of the
principal streets fine new buildings have been completed, and many are
now in the course of construction. The roads, it must be said, are
execrably paved, so uneven that driving is a torture. But the reason
they have not been repaved during the present régime is because a new
drainage system is about to be carried out, and when this is done they
will be asphalted and converted into boulevards. The natural situation
of “Beograd”—or the White Fortress—is magnificent, high up on a hill at
the junction of the Save and the Danube. Behind rises the extinct
volcano of Avala, where, according to one tradition, a great treasure is
hidden, and to another that the mountain is rich in gold and silver
deposits.

The centre of life in Belgrade is the gay café of the Grand Hotel. From
five to seven in the afternoon everyone is there, card-playing, smoking,
sipping _slivovitza_ (plum gin) or drinking _bock_, and listening to the
excellent band, while the inner hall is filled with smart ladies and
their cavaliers. Save the peasantry one sees about the street, the oxen
drawing primitive carts, and now and then a man wearing a fez, there is
little that is Eastern in Belgrade, save the slightly dark complexion
and cast of features of the Servians. For the most part the women are
very handsome, but they seem, like most Eastern races, to lose their
beauty at an early age.

Though I made it my duty to hear and study both sides of political
questions in Belgrade, and though I spent many hours with those in
fierce opposition to the present régime, I must say that I received on
every hand the greatest kindness, while everybody seemed ever ready to
render me a service.

The Servians are a highly intelligent and thoughtful race. The young
officers in the streets are not of the ogling, giggling genus one knows
so well in Germany, France, and Italy, but though smarter in appearance
than either nation, they are serious, polite, and gentlemanly to a
degree. The King, when speaking to me of military matters, pointed out a
curious fact, namely, that so intelligent was the average Servian
recruit that in six months he usually learnt what in France took him
eighteen months.

In feminine circles it struck me that there was a great extravagance in
dress. I saw the very latest Paris hats and smart, well-cut gowns, which
bore evidence of the expensive _couturière_ worn by the wives of
struggling officials, and I learnt that about ten pounds was no uncommon
price for a hat. All classes seem to vie with each other to dress well,
and in the brilliant salons at night one sees some of the smartest gowns
in Europe.

As regards cooking, I fear I cannot say very much that is favourable.
That at the Grand is decidedly poor, save perhaps the dishes of
delicious sterlet; and of the various restaurants I tried, the only one
which reached excellence was that kept by an Italian, one Perolo, who
was for many years chef to King Milan. There one can dine well—if one
knows what to order. The younger diplomatists dine there in a room
together, entrance to which is forbidden, save to a few chosen ones.

The diplomatic circle do a good deal of entertaining. The British
Minister and his wife give large dinner-parties every Tuesday, which are
very delightful functions; while each Thursday afternoon Mrs.
Whitehead—who is a very charming hostess—is at home. The Foreign Office
have certainly been happy in their choice of Mr. Whitehead to fulfil the
very difficult and onerous task of renewing diplomatic relations, for he
is a skilled diplomatist, and has been for many years in St. Petersburg,
Brussels, Tokio, Constantinople, and Berlin, where he was, until
recently, Councillor of Embassy. He also speaks Russian.

The Legation is one of the most tasteful houses in Belgrade, and is
filled with highly interesting collections from Japan. The German
Minister, Prince Max Ratibor, with his wife and stepdaughter, the young
Princess Taxis, also give a good many smart entertainments.

The capital is, of course, a hotbed of political intrigue, and all
foreigners arriving are suspected of being secret agents. They are
watched, their correspondence often opened, and their business in
Belgrade thoroughly investigated and reported upon. At first the
stranger resents this kind of thing. On my arrival I found myself
constantly watched, but as soon as it was known who and what I was, the
surveillance ceased.

I mentioned the matter to one of the high police officials, whereupon he
explained that in Belgrade alone he held a list of no fewer than 113
known secret agents of Austria! “We therefore keep secret agents for our
own protection. Can you blame us?” he asked.

In the diplomatic circle one hears everywhere a cry of “shame” upon the
false news which, being supposed to emanate from reliable sources in
Belgrade, is really manufactured across the Save at Zimony by
irresponsible journalists in the pay of Austria. The Servian officials
actually gave me the names of some of these gentlemen.

In the English newspapers one reads constantly telegrams from Vienna,
generally to that very irresponsible and sensational journal the _Zeit_,
declaring that there are all sorts of plots in Servia against King
Peter. A short time ago this journal actually had the audacity to say
that the Crown Prince was insane! Such telegrams should be read with
entire disbelief, for they emanate from certain Hungarian journalists
who were expelled from Belgrade on account of the false news despatched
from there, and now live across the river at Zimony, whence they
continually launch their tirades against Servia and the Servians.

What I read from time to time in the English papers regarding Servia is
so utterly opposed to the truth—and in our most responsible journals,
too—that it often utterly amazes me.

There is a scheme on foot started by an English company to build a large
new hotel in Belgrade—which is badly wanted. The Grand is full to
overflowing all the year round, and strangers are nightly turned away.
It is, I believe, intended to build the hotel on English lines, with a
few private sitting-rooms where the traveller can be quiet and rest in
peace away from the turmoil and clatter inseparable from a huge garish
café.

The streets are usually broad, straight, and if not actually handsome
thoroughfares, are well adapted for improvement and the erection of
larger buildings. Most of the suburban houses are of a ground floor
only, which strike the Englishman as curious; for as the windows are on
a level with the street, there is an utter lack of privacy in family
life. Servians of both sexes, I noticed, are great cigarette-smokers,
and Servian cigarettes I found were the best in the Balkans.

The pleasantest promenade is the Kalemegdan, the pretty gardens situated
behind the old fortress which commands the junction of the Danube and
the Save, while on the bank rises the Neboyscha (the fearless) tower, of
which many terrible tales are told of the days of the Turks. In the
Kalemegdan, adorned with bronze busts of Servian poets and savants,
smart Belgrade promenades every afternoon and admires the beautiful view
from the Fikir-Bair (“the slope of dreaming”), the smart uniforms of the
officers lending the necessary touch of colour to complete a charming
scene.

The religion is, of course, Greek Orthodox, with the independent Servian
Church, while the population of Servia is about three millions. Some of
the characteristic traits of the Servians are curious and interesting.
Every Servian family has, each year, its saint’s day, and in every
Servian drawing-room one finds a small wood panel with the image of that
saint painted thereon. The day usually falls upon that of some great
fête such as that of St. Nicholas, the Archangel Michael, etc., which
are perhaps the two most fêted. The day in question is called the
_Slava_ (fête of the patron saint of the family). The saint fêted by the
head of the family is also fêted by his wife, children, and servants.

Some days before the fête the priest visits the house for the
benediction of water placed in a basin, after which he sprinkles with a
bunch of basil all members of the family, as well as various rooms, and
the image of the fêted saint.

All the household regard the week prior to the fête as a fast. The eve
of the day of the _Slava_ the lamp is lit before the image of the saint,
and is burnt for two days. A couple of days before the anniversary a
tasty dish is prepared, called the _Koljivo_, mainly composed of wheat,
nuts, and almonds. Those families, however, who fête the Archangel
Michael do not prepare this cake, for the people believe that the
Archangel still lives, and cakes are only offerings to the dead.

[Illustration:

  HIS EXCELLENCY DR. MILENKO VESNITCH,
  Servian Minister of Justice.
]

On the morning of the fête the head of the family lights a taper, and
the priest, after a ceremony, cuts a kind of bread specially prepared
and bearing a cross; after which he sprinkles wine upon it and upon the
_Koljivo_.

Everybody, from early morning, salutes the head of the family with the
words, “Sretna slava” (a happy fête), and grasps his hand. If the
visitor is a man, he embraces the husband; if a woman, the wife. The
daughter of the house offers the _Koljivo_ to the guests, and everyone
takes a spoonful of _slatko_—a kind of fruit preserve—brandy and coffee.
At noon, wine is also drunk. To the houses of the better class telegrams
and letters arrive all day. In the country districts the day is given up
to eating, drinking, singing, and toasts.

The fêted saint is considered to be the protector of the family, to whom
daily prayers are said and mediation asked with the Almighty.

Next to the _Slava_, the fête most widely celebrated is Christmas. There
is a Servian couplet that runs—

        “_As there’s no day without light,
        So there’s no rejoicing without the Servian Christmas._”

After a long fast, the Servian people await Christmas impatiently. It is
a day of feasting in the whole country. Two days before Christmas
Day—old style, of course—roasts are prepared, consisting of a lamb and a
sucking-pig. On the morning of Christmas Eve one of the boys of the
family goes into the forest and cuts the Christmas log or _Badgnak_—a
usage which was recognised in the old days in France. Choosing a young
tree, he recites a prayer and cuts it down, while another lad is careful
that the first branch cut does not fall to the ground. He clutches hold
of it, and it is placed in the milk, so that good cream shall be
produced, or upon the beehive, that the bees may bring good honey. The
bringing home of the Christmas log is attended by many quaint
ceremonies.

That evening, while the family is at supper—which mostly consists of
fruits—the head of the house takes three nuts in his right hand, and
throwing them towards the east exclaims, “In the name of the Father”;
then three others, which he throws to the west saying, “and of the Son”;
and then three others he throws to the north, adding, “and of the Holy
Ghost.” Then with three others he makes the sign of the cross, and
throwing them to the south, exclaims “Amen.”

With the dawn of Christmas Day visits commence, the first person
generally to arrive being a young man neighbour, known as the
_polaznik_. He embraces the master of the house, makes the sign of the
cross upon the Yule-log, and wishes good luck to the household. In the
Christmas cake is placed a piece of money, and the person to whom it
falls will have good fortune all the year.

The Easter feast comes third with the Servians, and is a great occasion
for egg-breaking, one egg being broken against the other. Each visitor
receives an egg, and the fête lasts three days. The gipsies, of whom
there are very many in the Balkans, go from house to house at Easter,
singing and wishing good fortune to the householders, receiving, of
course, money in return for their good wishes.

There is also an extraordinary institution among the Servians called the
_pobratime_. It often occurs that two persons of the same sex love one
another very dearly, and regret that they are not allied by
relationship. In such a case they go through a solemn ceremony, and
become _pobratimes_, or brothers by election. It is the same with both
sexes. In many cases religion or nationality does not count, for there
are numbers of cases where a Serb has chosen for _pobratime_ a Turk or
an Albanian. In some cases the ceremony is a grave and solemn one before
a priest. Sometimes, indeed, the two persons make a slight cut in each
other’s hands, and suck each other’s blood, so becoming blood relations.
This custom is, strangely enough, very prevalent among the more savage
of the African tribes. The _pobratimes_ remain faithful and devoted one
to the other until death.

[Illustration:

  HIS EXCELLENCY COSTA STOYANOVITCH,
  Servian Minister of Commerce.
]

Belgrade resembles no other European capital for several reasons. There
are no poor quarters of squalor and misery, and pauperism is unknown.
During the whole time I was in the capital not a single person solicited
alms. During the last thirty years land in the vicinity of the city has
quadrupled in value. Each house is generally occupied by one family, and
almost every house has a pretty garden or courtyard. For many years
there has been constant rebuilding, and nowadays houses are usually
built of brick in preference to stone—although there is a Brick Trust in
the country. A good granite is also employed, and the new buildings are
mostly ornate and handsome.

Modern Belgrade is well planned. The Rue Terasia and the Rue Prince
Michel run on the highest part of the plateau and form the main artery
of traffic, while from these two streets diverge other thoroughfares, on
the one side leading to the Danube, and on the other to the Save.

Viewed from the Danube, the panorama of Belgrade is a fine and imposing
one. A commodious quay is badly required for the ever-increasing river
traffic, but plans have already been prepared, and shortly the work will
be put in hand. High above the river runs the pleasant promenade in the
Kalemegdan Gardens, leading to the old fortress with its time-mellowed
red brick bastions, now turned into a prison. The position of the city
is certainly well adapted to expand into a really fine, handsome
capital, as it must become in the near future. It is the centre of
intellectual life of Servia. The Library and Museum testify to the
literary tastes of the Servians. The Museum is very rich in antiques,
and contains a highly interesting numismatic collection. Both science
and art are well cultivated in the Servian capital, which is also the
headquarters of the Metropolitan Archbishop, the courts of Cassation and
of Appeal, the État Major, the Military School, the Faculties, and the
Ecclesiastical School.

The capital of Servia therefore occupies a most favourable position, and
is designed to become a very important centre of commerce. Its situation
being at the junction of the Save and the Danube, at the head of the
railway which unites the European capitals with the Black Sea ports, as
well as with Salonica and Constantinople, it cannot fail to be the gate
of the whole commerce of the Orient. It is, indeed, the Gateway of the
East.

Nisch, in the south, is the town second in importance. In 1874 it
contained only 12,000 population, while to-day it has more than 30,000
inhabitants. Standing as it does at the junction of the Oriental with
the European railways, all the merchandise to or from Turkey passes
through it: either by way of Sofia, or by Usküb and Macedonia. The old
Turkish quarter has been recently destroyed, wide streets built, and the
town thoroughly modernised and brought up to date, while there are
several comfortable hotels. The country around Nisch is noted for its
excellent light wines, which, having tasted, I can recommend. In Nisch,
as in many other parts of Servia, there are many openings for the
profitable employment of British capital.

The Servian Government is anxious to promote commerce and industry
throughout the kingdom. It is ready to give facility and encouragement
to foreigners—and especially the English—to exploit the wealth that
undoubtedly abounds, and it will treat them honestly, justly, and well.

Country life presents many interesting features. The Servian is much
more industrious than the Roumanian or the Bulgar, and consequently is
much more the master of his own household. The house of the Servian
peasant is generally constructed of brick, situate in the valleys and
ravines, and is usually of one storey only. There are generally three or
four rooms, the larger one being used as a common sitting and dining
room. The furniture of the common room is very simple—a table, chairs,
and settle and wardrobe; while upon the whitewashed walls are coloured
religious prints. The other rooms are covered with bright-coloured
Servian carpets, and in some villages of the Machva and the valley of
the Morava—where the peasants appear to live in greater comfort—I found
Viennese bent-wood furniture. In the poorer districts the house often
consists of one room only, and is often constructed by the peasant
himself. Each house has its little garden, cultivated by the women or
the old folk, where vegetables are grown, more especially cabbages, of
which there is a great consumption in various forms, often preserved as
a kind of _choucroute_. Fresh-water fish is also a staple article of
diet, while caviare too is plentiful.

In my journey through Servia I was struck by the prosperity of the
peasant and his high intelligence everywhere. The country, especially in
the more mountainous districts, is most picturesque, and the quaint
costumes of both sexes are highly interesting. Time was when there were
many brigands in the more remote districts. An officer of my
acquaintance who has explored practically every corner of Servia told me
an amusing episode that quite lately occurred to him. He was riding one
day in the mountains in a far remote part of Servia, many miles from a
town, when he overtook a rather evil-looking man, who scowled at him. He
passed the time of day and inquired the road to his destination. Then he
added, “I’ve heard there are brigands round about here. Is it true?”

“Brigands!” exclaimed the man. “Well, we used to be brigands. But
nowadays the law is so strict that I and my comrades have given it up!”

The costume of the Servian peasant-women is quaint and of interest. It
consists of an ample skirt of wool or silk and a corset on which, over
the chest, is placed a piece of white gauze crossed. Over this is a kind
of bolero of tanned skin with the fur inside, cut lower than the waist
at the back, and open in front. Upon it are often gold or silver
embroideries. Upon the head is worn a small scarlet fez, around which
the plaited hair is coiled. The fez is often embroidered with seed
pearls, which descend from generation to generation and are often worth
twenty to thirty pounds. Then, lastly, there is the apron, which is part
of the national costume, and is of wool, hand-embroidered in gay
colours, many of them being of quaint and original design.

In the towns both men and women now adopt European costume. In the
country every peasant possesses a gun, and shooting as they do from
childhood, they are mostly very fine shots. They love the chase, and
shoot everything they can, for the country is full of all kinds of birds
and animals.

There is a good deal of superstition among the peasants, who are an
imaginative people, who believe in vampires, evil spirits, and witches,
and have many extraordinary legends and sayings concerning them.




                               CHAPTER II
                       AN AUDIENCE OF KING PETER

At the New Konak—I sign His Majesty’s birthday-book—The
    audience-chamber—King Peter greets me, and we chat over
    cigarettes—My private audience—His Majesty and English
    capitalists—Great openings for British enterprise—The King gives me
    some instances of paying concerns, and tells me many interesting
    facts—His Majesty invites me to return.


As I drove into the wide gates of the New Konak one evening in November
to have private audience of His Majesty King Peter of Servia, sentries
saluted, idling detectives bowed, and the lines of blue-and-gold
servants drawn up in the entrance all bent low with one accord. The
royal palace is, indeed, well guarded.

In the large inner hall was a wide horseshoe staircase, which I
ascended. On every hand was a regal splendour, all in excellent taste
and all very new, for the palace built by King Milan has been renovated
since 1903, when the former royal residence of such tragic memory was
pulled down. Its site is now a pretty lawn.

At the head of the stairs the Royal Marechal, Colonel Tcholak-Antich, a
young man in bright blue uniform and many decorations, met me. With the
usual etiquette he told me his name, I told him mine, and we shook
hands. Then he said, “His Majesty is anxious that you should sign his
birthday book,” and he led me to the big council-chamber, where at the
head of the table he opened a beautiful book, which I signed upon the
proper page.

[Illustration: The Royal Palace, Belgrade: The Ballroom.]

I was at once conducted to the audience-chamber, the double doors of
which—to prevent eavesdroppers—were closed behind me, and I was left
alone to await His Majesty. The room, of fine dimensions, seemed, under
the myriad electric lamps, ablaze with gold. The beautiful gilt
furniture showed well against the carpet of crushed-strawberry, the
damask of the upholstery matching the carpet and being brocaded with
gold. Several fine modern paintings were upon the walls, and in the
centre of the magnificent apartment a large settee and several fine gilt
chairs set against a big gilt Renaissance table.

Scarce had I time to glance at my surroundings when the long white
folding-doors at the end of the room opened, and there entered a slim,
alert figure in a dark blue military uniform—a keen, dark-eyed,
grey-moustached man with a pleasant smile and hand outstretched—His
Majesty.

I made my obeisance, and took the proffered hand. “Come,” said the King
kindly in French, seating himself at the table, and motioning me to a
chair opposite him. “Well,” he commenced, “you know I have lived in
London, and I have heard of you, Monsieur N——,” and he went on to say
some highly gratifying words concerning myself; then producing a big
silver box of most excellent Servian cigarettes, gave me one, held the
match for me, and also smoked himself. He was, I noticed, quick, smart,
and shrewd, with both figure and bearing that greatly reminded me of
Lord Roberts, his general’s dark undress uniform being relieved by one
touch of colour, the crimson-and-white ribbon and white enamelled star
of Karageorge.

Then, when we were comfortably settled, I explained to him my reasons
for visiting the Balkans.

“You are very welcome here in Servia,” His Majesty said. “You have been
kind enough to say generous things about our country. All we ask of you
is not to flatter us—only inquire the truth for yourself. We Servians
have our faults—all nations have. But it must be remembered that we are
a young nation—like France was after the war of 1870. The Press of
Europe have not been altogether fair to us, for very many false
statements have been published regarding our people, and myself
personally. But how could they be contradicted? We only wish the organs
of the British Press would tell the truth regarding Servia. We have
enemies—who has not? But our policy is one of peace, and our earnest
endeavour is to develop the great resources of our country. Servia is,
as you know, one of the richest mineral countries in Europe.”

“I presume your Majesty’s Government will grant concessions for the
working of mines, or for other industrial enterprises?”

“Most readily. But only to responsible persons, who can show their
earnestness and that capital is at their command. Of late we have had
many concession-hunters here from various parts of Europe, but the
majority have gone empty away because they were discovered to be mere
speculators. No. Our urgent desire is that your British capitalists
should come here and study matters for themselves.”

“I believe some mines are already being worked by foreign capital?” I
remarked.

“Certainly—and very wealthy they are too. Take the Bor copper mine, for
instance. I visited it myself this year. The 500-franc shares are now at
3000 francs, and the output will shortly be enormous. They have recently
discovered in the workings traces that the ancient Romans had been
there. It will, so experts say, be found to be one of the richest copper
mines in Europe. Besides copper we have iron, coal, antimony, and even
gold—all of which might, with great advantage, be exploited by English
companies. We invite the English in preference, because I know that
English commercial undertakings are, for the most part, solid and sound.
You English always think well before you commence, and when you do
commence you go straight on to success. Therefore any industrial
enterprise, or any railways—which we want badly—that you may suggest to
us on behalf of British capitalists shall have our most earnest
consideration. That the country is in a settled state and is prospering
is, I think, shown by our finances. Before 1903 there was constantly a
deficit on the Budget. In 1903 we had over one million francs in excess
of the estimates, in 1904 we had five millions, and in 1905 a little
over four millions. Our engagements are regularly paid, and we have no
floating debt.”

[Illustration: Royal Palace: Belgrade.]

[Illustration: Principal Boulevard of Belgrade.]

“And the future?”

“Ah! you want me to talk politics,” he laughed, raising his hand with
the fine diamond upon it. “No. I make a rule never to do so. One of our
chief faults in Servia is that we gossip too much upon politics. You
have noticed that, I daresay, in the cafés, in the Legations, and
elsewhere—eh? All we Servians are the same—in Montenegro, in Bosnia, and
elsewhere. It is always so with a young nation. The future of Servia
will, I fervently hope, be one of peace and prosperity. It shall be my
most earnest endeavour to secure this for my people, so that Servia may
prove to Europe that she does not now merit the hard things said of her
in the past.”

His Majesty, after we had chatted about Florence, a city which I found
he knew quite well, then told me a very interesting fact. “We have here,
in Servia,” he said, “a most wonderful cure for rheumatism—the Ribarska
Banya. I only tell you what happened personally to me. During the
Russo-Turkish War I contracted acute rheumatism, and have been a martyr
to it ever since. I visited every watering-place in Europe, but none of
the so-called “cures” did me any good. Two years ago, with some
reluctance, I went to Ribarska and took the cure, and from that moment I
have never since been troubled. It was miraculous! With my own eyes I
saw a poor woman wheeled there entirely crippled, and twenty days later
I saw her commencing to walk. I would not have believed it had I not
seen it with my own eyes.”

For an hour and a half we chatted upon many things—of London, of Paris,
of Rome, of Vienna—for His Majesty is essentially an up-to-date man of
the world, as well as a monarch. Sincere and yet humorous, kindly and
yet with a hauteur that well befits his military bearing, he struck me
as a man well adapted to rule the Servian nation—a man who is thoroughly
in earnest, and is doing his level best for the future of his nation.
“We want no external troubles,” he declared to me. “We want to be
allowed to progress.”

And when I took my leave His Majesty grasped my hand warmly, saying, “I
hope, M’sieur N——, you will return to Servia often, and remember that
whenever you are in Belgrade I shall always be happy to give you
audience and have another chat with you. _Bon soir._”

I bowed. The long white doors opened noiselessly by an unseen hand, and
His Majesty was gone.

Next day an aide-de-camp brought me the autographed portrait which
appears in these pages, together with a very kindly message from His
Majesty.

Not only did I endeavour to learn the truth at the royal palace, but I
went among the people in various towns in Servia, making inquiries, and
I found on every hand that Servia was pleased and satisfied with her new
ruler.

King Peter was born on July 11, 1844, at Belgrade. A son of the reigning
Prince Alexander Karageorgevitch. Educated at Belgrade and Geneva, he
went to St. Cyr in France, and afterwards, during the war of 1870,
volunteered in the French army. In 1883 he married the Princess Zorka,
eldest daughter of Prince Nicholas of Montenegro, with whom he led a
very happy family life until her unfortunate death in 1890. For about
ten years he lived in Montenegro, but after his wife’s death he went to
Geneva for the education of his children. In Montenegro there is still
great admiration for him among the people, who have always regarded him
as one of the Serb princes.

There were four children, of whom three are still living, namely, the
Crown Prince George, now aged 20; Princess Helene, aged 19; and Prince
Alexander, aged 18. The Crown Prince after his studies in Geneva was
admitted by order of the Tzar into the Noble Guard at St. Petersburg,
and on the accession of his father left Russia to complete his studies
in Servia. At the present time he is engaged in university studies,
combined with his military ones. I had an opportunity of meeting him,
and found him a very smart and intelligent young fellow. Legally he is
now of age, and lately he represented his father at a great national
festivity, and acquitted himself with complete success. He is greatly
interested in all military questions, and is himself one of the best
riders in the country.

[Illustration: HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE GEORGE OF SERVIA.]

In his domestic circle the King is a model father, and his actions and
views are designed to promote in every way a good family life among his
people. He leaves politics to his Ministers, who are all of them highly
responsible men, but greatly interests himself in sanitation,
improvements in agriculture, the securing of a better standard of
morality, and in all questions of religion—in fact, his chief aim is the
advancement and well-being of his people, which, he is confident, cannot
be attained without a strong religious belief.

Only a short time ago he was making a tour in the country when to him
came the priests and authorities complaining that the people did not go
to church. His Majesty’s reply to the priests was: “If the people do not
come to you, you should go to them.”

From my own personal observation of His Majesty, I found him to be
exceedingly active, both physically and mentally. Though sixty-two years
of age, he may be seen every morning at five o’clock out riding in the
environs of Belgrade, making inspections of military camps and often
gossiping with and giving counsel to the lowliest peasants. Many are the
amusing stories told of these encounters, for often the peasants are
unaware that it is their sovereign. On one occasion, quite lately, he
was speaking with a peasant who complained to him of misbehaviour of a
subordinate functionary, and said, “The King ought to know it!”
whereupon His Majesty replied, “Yes, I think so. I will certainly tell
him.”

His Majesty told me himself that he does not believe in the old idea
that “the King can do no wrong,” or that monarchs are only “_par la
grâce de Dieu_.” He is of opinion that they should do everything to
fulfil the second part of the formula, “by the will of the people,” and
do their utmost for the people over whom they rule.

Without prejudice, and without bias, I have no hesitation in saying that
Servia to-day is under a most beneficent régime, and it is hoped that
her ruler, a splendid type of man and an up-to-date monarch, may be
spared many years to realise the high aspirations which he has for the
country that gave him birth.




                              CHAPTER III
                     SERVIA’S AIMS AND ASPIRATIONS

Audiences of M. Pachitch, the Premier and “strong man” of Servia, and of
    M. Stoyanovitch, Minister of Commerce—My friend, Dr. Milenko
    Vesnitch, Minister of Justice—The Servian case as I found it—Austria
    Servia’s arch-enemy—Dr. Vesnitch an up-to-date politician—Undeniable
    prosperity of the country under King Peter’s rule.


He who attempts to study Servian politics will find himself engulfed in
a perfect vortex of mystery and intrigue.

Politics occupy everyone’s thought in Belgrade. The Pachitch Party is on
everyone’s tongue. Be it at the luncheon table of the restaurant, over
the card-table at the Grand Café at six o’clock, in the salons of the
Ministers’ wives, or at the smart diplomatic receptions, the gossip is
always of politics. Hence it is that the secret agent is everywhere, and
one hears complaints on every hand of telegrams being noted and letters
tampered with.

Having regard to recent events and the presence of a horde of Austrian
spies, this is not, perhaps, surprising. Though Servia is undoubtedly
prospering and contented under King Peter and the present Ministry, yet
there is, of course, in politics an opposition—though not a formidable
one.

During my stay in Belgrade, besides being graciously granted private
audience by His Majesty King Peter, I had many opportunities of
discussing Servian politics with the Premier, M. Nicholas Pachitch; Dr.
Milenko Vesnitch, Minister of Justice; M. Stoyanovitch, the Minister of
Commerce; M. Patchu, Minister of Finance; M. Andrea Nikolitch, Minister
of Public Instruction; M. Yovan Gyaya, who has formed the new Radical
Party; and many other leading men of both sides. I very carefully
investigated each question, in order to present to the British public,
for the first time, the actual truth of the present state of affairs in
Servia.

Quite recently the British Government resumed diplomatic relations with
the Servian Court, therefore it is fitting that a fair and unbiassed
statement should now be put forward, in order to show Servia as she
really is, her aims, her aspirations, and her future policy in the
Balkans.

I confess that I found considerable difficulty in forming my
conclusions. The policy, however, which the present strong and
level-headed Government are pursuing is a policy which, having carefully
heard both sides, I have no hesitation whatever in endorsing as the very
best for the peace and future of the nation. It is strong, without being
belligerent, even though Austria has never ceased to annoy, irritate,
and intrigue.

Balkan questions are both difficult and intricate, but I will endeavour
to describe the true state of affairs as plainly and briefly as
possible. This work, though not intended to be a political treatise,
would be incomplete without some explanation of the mysteries of the
politics of the various Balkan countries I visited. Therefore, at risk
of being perhaps a little too outspoken, I will state the Servian case
just as I found it.

One of the burning questions in Servia at the present time is the
Customs War with Austria. The latter Power has endeavoured to ruin
Servia, but has fortunately not succeeded, even though her emissaries
are everywhere, and many newspaper correspondents are undoubtedly in her
pay. For this latter reason Servia has, for many years past, been
presented to Europe in a false light and columns of untruths telegraphed
from Zimony, or Semlin, the Hungarian town on the opposite bank of the
Save.

Briefly, the truth is as follows:—

Austria—and with her Germany—is slowly but surely marching to the East.
One sees and hears evidence of it everywhere in the Balkans. The
extended talons of the Austrian eagle are as apparent—and perhaps more
so in Servia than in Montenegro. Servia bars Austria’s way southward to
that much-coveted port, Salonica. It is therefore not to Austria’s
interest that Servia should be at peace. Unfortunately for Servia, the
Occidental people view the Eastern questions through the spectacles of
the Vienna Press, which is—for the most part—inspired by the Austrian
Government.

Austria is at the bottom of the whole of the Servian difficulties. As
long as things went badly in Servia—as under the régime of the late King
Alexander—they allowed matters to go on without interference, and
watched eagerly for the downfall of the kingdom. Unfortunate events
occurred, as is well known, but to the great dismay of Servia’s
arch-enemy, the country has become contented and is greatly prospering
under the rule of King Peter. For this reason, therefore, because a
prosperous era has set in, Austria has once again sought to stir discord
and to create troubles and difficulties. At the moment of writing the
secret police have a long list of over one hundred Austrian political
agents living in Belgrade alone!

How Austria seeks to compromise Servia in the eyes of Europe, and the
scandalous methods by which she is seeking to attain that end, is well
illustrated by a telegram which was supposed to emanate from Odessa, but
which I have indisputable evidence came from the same source as all the
others—an unscrupulous correspondent in Vienna in the secret pay of the
Austrian Government.

[Illustration:

  MR. ALEX. TUCKER,
  Servian Consul-General in London.
]

[Illustration:

  MR. BEETHOM WHITEHEAD,
  British Minister at Belgrade.
]

The amazing telegram in question appeared in the London newspapers on
January 2 this year, and was as follows:—

  “The local agency of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which
  for the last twenty years has been specially retained in Odessa as a
  convenient medium of secret intelligence respecting the Balkan States,
  is in possession of indisputable proofs of the existence,
  notwithstanding all recent and official denials from Belgrade, of a
  widely ramified and elaborately matured plot for the execution of a
  sudden _coup d’état_ and the expulsion of the Karageorgevitch dynasty
  from Servia. Leading members, civil and military, of both the chief
  political parties are stated to have joined the conspiracy.

  “According to this information, the intended first result of the _coup
  d’état_, if it be not marred, will be the establishment of a
  provisional regency in the administrative hands of six or eight
  Ministers. The regents would then take time to prepare a comprehensive
  explanatory statement of the situation for presentation to the Great
  Powers, which they would also consult as to the choice of an alien
  prince for the royal throne of Servia. They will urge upon the
  friendly consideration of the Powers the fact that the two peasant
  dynasties of Obrenovitch and Karageorgevitch have been fairly tried
  and justly found impossible and incompatible with the economical
  welfare and progressive culture necessary to the worthy attainment of
  Servia’s proper political destiny.”

In reply to this, the Servian Government nailed the lies upon Austria by
the following official statement, issued on January 3 from the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs at Belgrade:—

  “All sorts of misleading fabrications have lately been issued to the
  world by the Austrian Press for the purpose of compromising the
  political situation in Servia, the latest report being that of an
  alleged plot to exile the Karageorgevitch dynasty. Gradually and
  systematically the Viennese newspapers have been communicating to the
  foreign Press alarming news, injurious to Servia’s good name, and
  certain quarters in Vienna consider it necessary to reserve the
  fabrication regarding the exile of the Karageorgevitch dynasty as the
  final stroke on the eve of the conclusion of the Servian loan. The
  Austrian Press has even gone so far as to make use of prevarications
  in order to succeed in giving credence to its report regarding the
  exile of the royal dynasty, alleging they had obtained news from the
  Russian Agency created at Odessa by the Russian Minister of Foreign
  Affairs for special political service in the Balkans. According to our
  information, _such an agency does not even exist_.”

Again, an ingenious gentleman representing the Vienna _Zeit_, who lives
opposite Belgrade, at Semlin, in Hungary, and fears to cross into
Servia, sent the other day, not only to the _Zeit_ but to the _Daily
Mail_, an extraordinary telegram declaring the Servian Crown Prince to
be slightly demented, and casting all sorts of insinuations as to what
was happening in the palace.

I chanced to be in Belgrade at the time, and showed the Crown Prince the
ridiculous concoction, and we both laughed over it.

“Bah!” he said, “it is really too silly to require contradiction.”

The true fact is that the young Crown Prince, who gave me the signed
portrait that appears in these pages, is a particularly smart young man,
and not only do his tutors, but also the Cabinet Ministers of Servia,
speak in the highest terms of his tact and intelligence.

But to Austria no method is too mean or too unscrupulous by which to
circulate false news to the detriment of Servia. Ask any Servian, and he
will tell you of Austria’s machinations in every quarter.

Quite recently a Servian author wrote some libellous and untrue articles
regarding the present dynasty, and was consequently arrested and
condemned to imprisonment. Whereupon the Austrian Minister in Belgrade,
without asking permission of the Minister of Justice, went to the prison
and prevailed upon the Governor to be allowed to see the prisoner
privately. Such action surely speaks louder than words!

The Austrian attitude was well exhibited on the occasion of the
accession of King Peter. His Majesty received two telegrams. The first
was from the Tzar, who said, “I hope you may be able to bring happiness
to the Servian people, and by doing so you will receive my friendship.”
The other was from the Emperor Francis Josef, and was certainly in the
spirit of dividing King and people, for His Majesty merely expressed a
hope that the evils existing would be remedied.

Austria’s chief aim in Servia is to estrange the people from their King,
to create as much discord and discontent as possible to crush the trade
of the country and to keep her poor. As long as she believed that Servia
was in a bad position economically and financially, things were allowed
to go from bad to worse. But as soon as an improvement was observed in
the national prosperity, a hostile policy was adopted, which has
rendered trade between the two countries impossible.

Careful inquiries of the Servian Cabinet Ministers and many statesmen of
both political parties show that even in the present position, with
Austria closed against her, Servia is nevertheless progressing, and
prospering more than the outside world ever dreams.

The last commercial treaty between Austria and Servia expired in 1904.
There was a desire on the part of Servia to at once renew it, but this
Austria-Hungary was unable to do, as she was rearranging her treaty with
Germany. When, however, the first negotiations were started, Austria
made very severe complaints regarding the Serbo-Bulgarian Customs Union,
and asked that the treaty in question should be annulled before
negotiations for the new treaty were started. The Servian Government,
desirous of pleasing Austria, replied that in the Serbo-Bulgarian
Customs Union there was a clause to the effect that if one of the Great
Powers raised a protest, amendments might be introduced. They therefore
suggested the postponement of this question, hoping that Austria was
satisfied, and would begin the _pourparlers_. But no such thing. Austria
had other aims, for very soon they coolly declared that if the
commercial treaty were renewed, Servia must buy her new armament for the
artillery of the Scoda works in Austria. This is peculiar, inasmuch as
the cannon in question is not that in use by the Austrian artillery!

The reason for this has been explained by the fact that certain members
of the Austrian Imperial family were financially interested in the works
in question. This, however, was not the real reason. There was one far
more subtle. The true political reason, indeed, was that the Austrian
Government wished to get a seat in the “Autonom-Monopol”
administration—the body which controls the loans, and which consists of
six members, namely, one French delegate, one German, and four Servians.
France and Germany were both friendly, but Austria, had she gained a
seat there, could at once have created internal dissension and
difficulty.

Nominally, the annual income from this “Monopol” is about thirty million
dinars, or francs, of which twenty million go to the creditors, leaving
ten million at the free disposal of the Government. Now had Austria
obtained a hand in this administration, she would have been able to
exercise a prerogative and a right of intervention in many matters
affecting the good government of the country—a danger that will at once
be apparent.

Austrian intrigue is everywhere apparent, not only in Belgrade, but
throughout the whole of Servia. Austria does not wish either a national
or a staple Government in Servia, and so, because they could not obtain
their ends, and because the present Government voices the national ideas
of the whole of the Serb people—who are as a matter of fact spread over
Croatia, Slavonia, Bosnia, Herzegovina, Montenegro, and part of
Hungary—they have pursued the Customs War, and put a prohibitive tariff
upon everything in the endeavour to close entirely the world’s markets
to Servia. The latter has of course retaliated by placing a prohibitive
tariff upon all goods from those nations who have no treaty—a move which
is of course directed against Austria, but by which other Powers must,
for the present, suffer.

As regards England, the first commercial treaty made by Servia after the
Berlin Treaty was with Great Britain, and it served as the base of all
the other treaties. Of this Austria-Hungary was jealous, and from that
time until to-day Austria has done everything in her power to discredit
and discourage British trade in the Balkans. In fact, so seriously
detrimental has been Austria’s influence against British trade that
naturally some time must elapse ere the damage done can be repaired.

Meanwhile, a new commercial treaty with England has been arranged, for
it was in Servia’s greatest interest that this should be done. Every
Servian I spoke to was loud in his praises of England, and of English
methods. Servia is very anxious to export her agricultural produce to
England, while in Servia—now that Austrian imports have stopped—there
are many open markets for English goods.

Austria believed that as all Servian exports were sent into
Austria-Hungary, Servia would be obliged in the end to accept their
drastic and unfair terms—the purchase of cannon and other restrictions.
On the contrary, however, it says much for Servia’s enterprise that,
though the Austrian frontier has been closed during 1906, yet Servia has
exported all her goods by way of Varna or Braila, or by Salonica, to
which port a line of rail runs from Nisch. The producer has felt the
Austrian oppression but little, if any at all. In fact, it is the
opinion of many statesmen in Servia that it would actually be in the
country’s interests if Austria continues her present hostile Customs
policy, for it will then compel the Servians to look for markets farther
afield, and arouse them to take strong initiatives.

It should be noted, too, that fifteen years ago Austria raised the same
trouble with Roumania, and the Roumanians are now happily emancipated
from the Austrian market, and are consequently prosperous.

At present, with the Austrian frontier barred for export, Servia must
build a railway to the Adriatic. The line from Nisch, _viâ_ Usküb, to
Salonica, though it runs through Macedonia, is practically under
Austrian control, and goods sent over it from Servia are subjected to
high tariff. Therefore there is a project afoot to construct a new line
from Kragooyevatz across the Kopaonik Mountains to Prisrend, and thence
through Northern Albania down to Skodra and the Adriatic at the port of
San Giovanni di Medua. An alternative scheme is to construct the line so
that it passes through Montenegro, and joins the line at present being
made by an Italian company from Antivari on the coast to Virpasar on the
Lake of Scutari.

One or other of these two schemes will certainly be adopted in the near
future, and when the line is completed, Servia will at once be entirely
independent of Austria, and secure an outlet to the Adriatic. Such a
railway will be of great strategic importance, as will be seen from a
glance on the map. I have been over parts of the projected route, and
certainly it will be a very difficult line to construct, on account of
the wall of mountains lying between the Lake of Scutari and the Servian
frontier. But its opening will mean civilising the wild tribes of
Albania and the further cementing of the Serb nation.

This last point is, indeed, the chief line of the Servian Balkan policy.
In my conversations with the Premier, with Dr. Milenko Vesnitch,
Minister of Justice, and with the Ministers of Commerce and of Finance,
I found them all in accord upon the one great principle of policy,
namely, the preservation of the great Serb nation, which consists of
over ten million persons, spread through Bosnia, Herzegovina, Slavonia,
Kossovo, Montenegro, Servia, Dalmatia, and many parts of Hungary itself.
This great population speak the same language and have the same
aspirations, namely, the unity of the great nation whose past history is
such a splendid one.

The policy of the Servian Ministry, whether military, economical, or
political, is all directed towards this one end, and here it may be
pointed out that King Peter is grandson of the great hero of the Servian
people, the peasant Karageorge, who in 1804 raised the Servians against
the Turks and defeated them.

King Peter has already given evidence of his patriotic sentiments, not
only interesting himself in the nation before he was elected ruler, but
perhaps it is not generally remembered that in 1875 he fought at the
head of his troop—which he raised himself, and crippled his finances
thereby—for the emancipation of Bosnia. In the Servian national poetry
there is a hero called Peter Mrcognitch, the Protector of the Poor
against the oppressors, and it was under this assumed name that the
present ruler of Servia fought. In 1870, too, he fought with the French
against the Germans, and was awarded the Legion of Honour for valour on
the battlefield. Therefore the Servians regard him as a patriot—as
indeed he is—and up to the present he has certainly shown himself an
able, wise, and discreet ruler, who has the interests of his country
very deeply at heart.

[Illustration: The Road to the East: The last view of Europe.]

[Illustration: Villagers and Gypsies in Miriavo (Servia).]

To refer to the tragic events of the night of June 11, 1903, is
unnecessary. All I can personally say is that I arrived in Belgrade full
of an Englishman’s natural prejudice against the present régime, but
after careful inquiry, not only in government and diplomatic circles,
but also among the adherents of the old régime, I came to the conclusion
that though drastic and cruel, yet had not those events happened that
night, hundreds of unfortunate ones would have lost their lives on the
following morning.

In the régime of the late King no one was safe in Belgrade. Draga had
her spies everywhere, and alas for those who dared to utter a word
against her or her methods! Leading men in the political, social, and
literary world of Belgrade to-day have explained to me how they had from
day to day lived in fear and dread of false accusations and arrest,
until life became so intolerable that many were almost driven from the
country. These men strongly disagreed with the methods of the regicides,
but they are now thankful they are free.

The truth of those black days of spies and suspicion in Belgrade in the
last days of Alexander’s reign has never been told. Only those who lived
there, and only those who hear the truth from the lips of responsible
persons, can realise how entirely the country was in the hands of one
unscrupulous woman. The journalists of Europe were horrified at the
methods by which the Obrenovitch were wiped out, and they condemned the
Servians. Not one had the courage, or the inclination, to put the facts
fairly and impartially before the public.




                               CHAPTER IV
                          THE FUTURE OF SERVIA

Servia and the Macedonian question—A sound Cabinet—England and
    Servia—Appointment of Mr. Beethom Whitehead as British Minister very
    gratifying to the Servians—King Peter ever solicitous for the
    welfare of the people—What the Prime Minister told me concerning the
    future—The new railway to the Adriatic.


I make no apology for the assassination of King Alexander and his Queen.
That matter is a closed page of Servian history. I only can state what I
saw and heard in Servia, and explain how I drew my own entirely
unbiassed conclusions.

One thing is certain, that Servia is at this moment in a very much more
prosperous condition than ever she was under King Alexander. Having met
every one of the Ministers, and spent many hours with them, I can safely
assert that, headed by M. Pachitch, quiet-mannered, sensible, and
thoughtful, they are, one and all, a very strong and intelligent
Cabinet, each member of which is doing his very utmost for the
commercial development and future welfare of the country he loves so
dearly.

There is no _poseur_ or political adventurer among them. Each man is a
sound, intelligent, and trustful statesman, whose watchword is, as His
Excellency Monsieur Pachitch put it to me, “Servia for the Servians.”

While in Belgrade I had several conversations with members of the
Cabinet, and also with Dr. J. Cvijic, the eminent author of that most
thoughtful work, _Remarks on the Ethnography of the Macedonian Slavs_,
regarding the all-absorbing question of Macedonia. Mention Macedonia to
any Balkan statesman, and he raises his shoulders and shakes his head.
It is a problem that nobody can solve. I endeavoured, however, by dint
of many inquiries, to discover in what way Servia would like the
Macedonian question settled.

Roughly speaking, Macedonia is divided into three _vilayets_—Kossovo,
Monastir, and Salonica. Now Kossovo is essentially Old Servia, and there
is no question that its people are still Serbs. Yet here we run up
against Austria again. She is doing all in her power to cause the
population to emigrate, and in their place attracting Albanians who
assist the Austrian propaganda. As regards the other two _vilayets_ of
Monastir and Salonica, the inhabitants are Serbs, Bulgars, Greeks, and
Mohammedans. Now it is a curious fact, and one which I believe no other
writer has noted, that until two years ago nobody spoke of any other
people in Macedonia but these. Suddenly, however, Europe was made aware
that there was still another people, for the Koutzo-Vlachs were, for the
first time, mentioned, and formed a new element in the already mixed
difficulty.

Now without doubt this new problem was introduced into the controversy
by Germany for two reasons. The first was to create, besides the
Mohammedan and Albanian, a Christian Conservative element for the
preservation of the Turk in Europe. Germany has therefore an economic
propaganda in Turkey, and when the time is ripe it will be followed by a
strong political one. She could not count on either Serbs or Bulgars in
Macedonia, but by this new intrigue she has courted the support of the
Mohammedans.

The second reason of the introduction of these hitherto unheard-of
Koutzo-Vlachs concerned the position in Roumania, of which a
Hohenzollern is King. Until two years ago the Roumanian patriots were
occupying themselves with a propaganda in Transylvania. As, however, it
is a great point in German policy to keep Roumania within the confines
of the Triple Alliance, and as hostilities had arisen between Austria
and Roumania on account of the propaganda, it was necessary for Germany
to find a means to occupy in some other way the fantasy of the Roumanian
people. And so the Koutzo-Vlachs were pushed forward as a fresh
discovery, and the King of Roumania, in a speech to his Parliament,
spoke of “their brothers in Macedonia.” Beyond this, all the claims put
in by the Koutzo-Vlachs for the expenses of their schools and other
things to-day receive the support of the German Ambassador at the Porte.

From the Servian point of view—a view that is shared very widely—it
would appear that the best method of solving the very difficult question
of Macedonia would be to give the various peoples complete
tolerance—that is, to give the Greeks, Serbs, Bulgarians, and Moslems
complete liberty to develop themselves for, say, ten years. After this
time a plebiscite, under the control of the Powers, might be established
with success. This would solve the ethnographical difficulty, which is
really the base of the whole question.

The signatories to the Berlin Treaty would do well to take the
initiative in this matter, and so end the internal trouble which is for
ever a disturbing element in Balkan politics. Servia is very anxious to
see England interesting and asserting her power more in the Balkans, and
British statesmen might well follow the policy of Palmerston and
Castlereagh. The first British representative to Servia was Colonel
Hodges, who in 1837 went to Belgrade, and very quickly secured a
predominant position in Servian matters, owing to the unselfishness of
the British policy in the Balkans and the liberal ideas which England
always represents in the world. The Servians therefore still look to
England as taking a leading part in the settlement of Macedonia, and the
sooner this is done the less peril will exist in the Near East.

Since the accession of King Peter many reforms have been introduced, and
on all sides the Servian people express content and prosperity. I will
give a few examples. For instance, in the budget before the King’s
accession there were periodical deficits, but every year since, as I
have already pointed out, shows a very substantial balance. Therefore
the present increasing prosperity is apparent at a glance. The financial
market, too, shows how Servian finances stand in Europe.

[Illustration: The British Legation: Belgrade.]

[Illustration: The Knes Mihajelowa: Belgrade.]

This is no doubt due, in the first place, to the constitutional
cautiousness of King Peter. He has inspired with confidence the
financial world in Paris and elsewhere, for it is well known that he is,
before all, a constitutional ruler, and that his Government will never
be anything else than a constitutional one. Therefore, by his attitude,
he has so improved the state of Servian finance that the future
prosperity of the country is assured.

When King Peter was proclaimed, the Servians restored their liberal
Constitution, which the late King, under the influence of his father,
had abrogated. This has opened the way to the development of the country
in every direction. There is, of course, much yet to be done. As regards
the administration of justice, several excellent reforms have been
introduced during the present reign. Dr. Vesnitch is at present
reforming the prison system, and is about to introduce, after studying
the question for fifteen years, a new and unique system. He is of
opinion that the prisoners from the towns should be separated from those
from the country, for two reasons.

He declares that when criminals from the towns commit crimes it is in
most cases because they are not sufficiently instructed in their skilled
labour. They are bad workmen, and hence their downfall. If, however,
they were classified and instructed in the prison, they would, when
discharged, be better prepared, with the assistance of the Prisoners’
Aid Societies, to seek an honest living. Again, the second reason is
that the influence of town-bred prisoners upon those from the country is
always an evil one, and should at all times be avoided. The Servian
Government have adopted the Minister’s point of view, and fresh prisons
are to be constructed upon that basis.

Another reform about to be introduced by Dr. Vesnitch is that of
“conditional release.” It is intended to preserve first offenders from
the demoralising influence of prison life, and to create a good moral
influence over those who commit a crime for the first time. In a word,
the Servian project seeks to conciliate the English method with the
French Loi Beranger.

In all the other administrations—public instruction, war, finance, and
agriculture—many other reforms have been introduced, and many are in
course of preparation. As a matter of fact, until two years ago Servia
had no University, but at present an excellent institution has been
established, the professors of which rank well with those of other
nations.

In the department of war, a very important reform is about to be carried
out, namely, the rearmament of the artillery. This is, of course, a wide
subject, and time must elapse before the defences of the country are in
an absolutely perfect state. Suffice it, however, to say that the
Ministers of War and Finance are exerting every effort to obtain the
best weapons in France, and, at the same time, to leave the country’s
finances uncrippled.

Recently diplomatic relations have been resumed with England, and the
Foreign Office have appointed Mr. Beethom Whitehead as Minister to
Servia. This has given great satisfaction to the Servians, for they see
in this action of England that their Government has already merited
serious consideration. The resumption of friendship with Great Britain
has been the means of greatly fortifying the Pachitch Ministry. It was
obtained through the good services of Italy and France, and especially
of the King of Italy, who, as is well known, is a great admirer of
England, in addition to being brother-in-law of King Peter.

Servia hopes that the result of this renewed friendship will be to
combat the German advances to the East; and this, of course, is greatly
to the advantage of England. The Servians also hope that in the near
future England will see her way to minimise the evils which Lord
Beaconsfield’s policy created in the Balkans when he allowed Austria to
occupy Bosnia and Herzegovina and to monopolise Balkan trade generally.
It is probable that Lord Beaconsfield’s error was due to his fear of a
Pan-Slavonic danger, but the time is certainly now ripe for England to
assert her power and stem the German tide.

It is within the range of possibility that ere long Russia will unite
with England, France, and Italy to take joint steps in the Balkans, and
if this is realised it will mean for Servia that her autonomy and free
development will be secured. Diplomacy is working towards this end, and
as the British Liberal Party is believed to be the protector of weak
nations, it is more than likely the hope will very soon mature.

I have in this chapter spoken always of Austria, and not of Hungary. I
have done so because Hungary hopes for her independence, and will, if
she gains it, certainly find herself on a level with Servia. The
sympathy between the Servian and Hungarian people is historical, and it
was proved lately by the transfer of the relics of the Hungarian hero,
Racotzy, who was the greatest opposer to Austrian rule. Quite recently
Wekerle, the Hungarian Premier, said in Parliament that “the basis of
Hungarian foreign policy has been, is, and has to be, the continuance of
Servia’s friendship.”

Hungary has always found warm friends in England on account of her
struggle for independence, and without doubt England will still support
her when the day comes. Until ten years ago it was generally thought in
Hungary that the Slav tendencies were dangerous to Hungary’s existence,
but that has now entirely changed, and instead of regarding Servia as an
enemy, they look upon her as an ally, and Germany as an enemy.

The renewal of diplomatic relations between Servia and England will, it
is felt certain, be the means of inducing British capitalists to make
inquiry of the many and excellent openings now existing. When once
England is materially interested in the Serb countries she will have a
motive in promoting Servia’s prosperity, and in protecting her from the
German advance, as a policy which surely will be to her own advancement.

It may be here interesting, too, if in conclusion I give a very brief
summary of the trade of Servia during 1905—the last published year—as
compared with the four previous years, as it will show the rapidly
growing prosperity under the present régime. In 1901 the exports were
65,685,653 fcs., and the imports 43,835,428 fcs.—a total of 109,521,081
fcs.; in 1902 the total was 116,944,408 fcs.; in 1903, 118,202,666 fcs.

For 1905 the figures were as follow:—

                          1905.        1904.     Difference in 1905.
                                                  more (+) less (-)
                           Fcs.         Fcs.         Fcs.
    Exports              71,996,274   62,156,066   +9,840,208
    Imports              55,600,644   60,926,406   -5,325,672
    Totals              127,596,918  123,082,472   +4,517,446
    Increase of trade    16,395,630    1,226,660

Thus it will be seen that the country is undoubtedly entering upon an
era of prosperity.

By the Department of Public Instruction I was afforded facilities for
studying the educational system, and a few facts may prove interesting.
Though Servia has been a free country for less than a century, education
has already reached a very high level. It possesses a large number of
primary schools, secondary schools, and special schools, as well as a
high school in Belgrade which has lately been turned into a university.

The name “popular schools” is given to infant schools, primary schools,
and the superior primary schools. The course in the primary schools
lasts for six years, and in the primary superior schools two years.
Children in towns are sent into the first class of primary schools at
the age of six, and in the country at seven, the school year commencing
on September 1 and ending on June 29.

Schoolmasters on leaving the training college receive 800 dinars
(francs) per annum, and rise to 3000 dinars. Beyond this they receive an
allowance of 30 to 80 dinars a month in lieu of lodging. For 1905 I was
unfortunately unable to obtain the statistics, but I found that in 1904
there were in Servia 1093 schools for boys and 170 schools for girls, or
1263 primary schools. There were 1349 masters and 856 mistresses, or a
total of 2205 teachers. At the end of that scholastic year there were
85,365 boys studying and 22,081 girls, a total of 107,446 scholars.
There were also five normal schools with 25 masters, and six schools for
young girls with 25 mistresses. There are also several excellent private
schools. One Protestant and one Catholic are in Belgrade, while of the
three private schools for girls two are in Belgrade and one in Nisch.

As regards secondary schools, the course lasts eight years and is
terminable by examination. When the high school, or university course,
is ended, the students intending to become masters receive a
supernumerary place in a secondary school with a salary of 1500 dinars.
After about two years they pass the examination of professors, whereupon
they receive 2500 dinars, which is raised periodically to 6000 dinars.
The time-limit for professors is thirty years. In the secondary schools
are masters of languages and fine arts, and a very high standard of
instruction is given. The last return showed there were 4561 scholars
and 313 masters in these schools. These figures, however, do not
comprise the private gymnasiums of Alexinac and Gradiste, or the
superior schools for young girls at Belgrade and Kragooyevac.

The special schools comprise the religious seminary, the academy of
commerce, and the schools of agriculture. The religious seminary is at
Belgrade, and the course of instruction lasts nine years. There are two
schools of male teachers, one at Alexinac and the other at Yagodina, and
also two schools for female teachers, at Belgrade and at Kragooyevac.
Here, the course is for four years. The Academy of Commerce is in
Belgrade, where a course of three years is given. There is an excellent
School of Agriculture at Kralyevo, as well as a School of Forestry and
Viticulture at Bukovo, where a three years’ course is given.

The University, which is at Belgrade, has only recently been
established, for hitherto it was only a high school. The instruction is
of the very highest order, and without doubt it will turn out many
intellectual men in the near future.

One afternoon I went to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to have audience
of M. Nicholas Pachitch, the President of the Council of Ministers and
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Foreign Office is a great comfortable old building adjoining the
gardens of the royal palace, painted dead white, and commanding from its
windows a beautiful view over the Save and the rolling plains beyond.
The ante-chamber is a sombre, old-fashioned room, with heavy furniture,
several fine pictures, and polished floor. But I was not given long to
inspect it, for a few minutes later I was ushered into the private room
of the man whom all Servia regards as the greatest and cleverest
politician—the man who is to make the New Servia.

I found him a quiet-mannered man, with kindly smiling eyes behind his
spectacles, his long beard and hair just silvered with grey, his voice
low, soft, and deliberate.

In the midst of a turbulent day—for the Skupshtina was sitting and
important questions were being discussed—he received me calmly, and
though two Cabinet Ministers were waiting outside for audience, he was
cool and deliberate. His manner was charmingly polite, and after
greeting me, gave me a seat at the table beside him, and readily
answered the questions I put to him.

“You have come here to learn about our country,” he said, smiling.
“Well, what can I tell you? You have, I daresay, heard a good deal in
England—some truth, and some facts that are untrue—facts manufactured by
the enemies of Servia! We want peace. Our tariff difficulties with
Austria are regrettable, but we cannot accept the Austrian terms. We
cannot guarantee to buy our war material and railway rolling-stock from
Austria. Because we are a small country the Austrian Empire is imposing
upon us terms which it is utterly impossible for us to accept. We must
arm our artillery with the best armament, be it Austrian, French,
German, or English. It is surely the duty of the Government to do this.
Why should we be bound to Austria in this matter? As regards England,
Servia is delighted at the resumption of diplomatic relations, and at
the appointment of Mr. Whitehead, who is a clever diplomatist, a
cosmopolitan, and who already understands us. It is now our intention to
show Europe that we are a sound nation, and by so doing we hope that
English capitalists will seek to exploit our vast mineral wealth. In
Servia there are mines in all parts—coal, iron, copper, lead, antimony,
zinc, and even gold. They only require working, and great profits must
accrue. I daresay you have seen the geological map which the Ministry of
Commerce has recently prepared. If not, I am sure Mr. Stoyanovitch, the
Minister, will allow you to see it.”

“And the present condition of the country?” I asked.

“Under the present rule the people have shown themselves absolutely
contented. There is an entire personal liberty which did not exist under
the late King. Our watchword is ‘Servia for the Servians.’ Our policy is
to avoid all outside complications, and endeavour to do our utmost to
develop the resources of the country.”

“And Macedonia?”

His Excellency smiled and shrugged his shoulders slightly.

“Ah! Macedonia!” he sighed. “Now you have touched upon a difficult
question. The population there is mixed, it is true, and the problem
puzzles every statesman in Europe; yet my own personal opinion is that
in the course of a year or two the Powers will discover a mode of
settlement which will be found to be beneficial to all concerned.”

“And the future policy of Servia?”

“You can tell them in England that all Servia desires is ‘peace,’” His
Excellency answered, smiling at me through his spectacles. “This we are
doing all we possibly can to promote. His Majesty has great admiration
for the English, and the Government are ready to grant concessions for
industrial and mining enterprises to English capitalists—if properly
introduced. I can assure you that they will find in Servia excellent
returns for their investments. But inquire for yourself, and you will
find that Servia is to-day more prosperous than ever she was under the
late King. Inquire among the people, not only in Belgrade, but away in
the heart of the country where you are going. Let the people speak for
themselves, and they will tell you how far our endeavours have been
successful.”

And then, after half an hour’s chat, during which he told me many
interesting facts, and gave me every facility to enable me to conduct my
inquiries, I rose, shook hands, and left, convinced that a Ministry
under such a clear, level-headed statesman—a really great man—could not
do otherwise than raise the country into a position of wealth combined
with respect.

Upon every Servian’s tongue I heard the name of Pachitch, and my own
observations all showed most conclusively that he and his party, with
the concurrence of the King, are guiding Servia to peace, happiness, and
great prosperity.

A few days later, while at luncheon at the house of Dr. Vesnitch,
Minister of Justice, I had an interview with M. Stoyanovitch, the
Minister of Commerce. He, like all the other members of the Cabinet, has
the interest of Servia deeply at heart. He is dark-haired, middle-aged,
keen, clever, and a thoroughly competent business man. Our conversation
mainly turned upon the projected railway to unite the Danube with San
Giovanni di Medua, in Albania, and so give to Russia, Roumania, and
Servia a port on the Adriatic.

The future of Servia, he declared, depended upon this line. She must
have a direct outlet for her trade, and he prophesied that within three
years the line would be built. The cost will be about 80,000,000 francs,
or 150,000 francs per kilometre. Roughly, the length is about 500
kilometres. He pointed out that an English company would experience but
little difficulty in obtaining a concession from the Turkish Government
to pass through Turkish territory, while a French and German company
would be prohibited. The line would be the highroad to Russia from the
south, and would be an extremely paying one, for in addition almost the
whole of the Servian imports and exports would be carried over it.

“British capitalists would do well to inquire into it,” he said. “We
have surveyed the route, and have the complete plans at the Ministry of
Public Works. To anyone introduced by you, Monsieur N——, we should be
very pleased to show them.”

And the Minister went into details as to the excellent results which
must certainly accrue from the undertaking and the profits which the
company would certainly make.

Servia has undoubtedly a very big future before her, and her statesmen
are ever looking far ahead.




                               CHAPTER V
                     TO-DAY AND TO-MORROW IN SERVIA

A retrospect—A sitting of the Skupshtina—Peasants as deputies—Servia as
    an open field for British enterprise—Enormous mineral wealth—Mr.
    Finney, a mining engineer who has prospected in Servia for seventeen
    years, tells me some interesting facts regarding rich mines awaiting
    development—No adventurers need apply.


Servia has, indeed, had a turbulent past.

For centuries she has been torn by war and ground under the heel of the
oppressor. From the days of Stevan Lazarevitch, at the end of the
fourteenth century, until the revolt of the Serbs against Turkish rule
under Karageorge in 1804, the country was constantly crushed and
constantly disturbed. Karageorge declared Belgrade and the neighbouring
region the free State of Servia, which was unfortunately not
accomplished until after great sacrifices and many heroic battles.

In 1813, however, while Russia was engaged in her final conflict with
Napoleon, the Turks again seized Servia, and Karageorge with several
other chiefs was exiled to Austria. Two years later, Milosch
Obrenovitch, with the aid of some chiefs, made another struggle for
liberty, which, thanks to the Treaty of Bucharest, was crowned with
success, and the interior autonomy of Servia thus became an accomplished
fact.

In 1842 Alexander Karageorgevitch, the younger son of Karageorge,
ascended the Servian throne as Prince, and under his rule the government
of the country was modelled upon modern lines, and many institutions
started which aided to develop the civilisation.

Exterior politics and the corruption of the officials by friends of the
Obrenovitch were successful in creating so much discontent that
Alexander at last abandoned the throne. Upon this, the Skupshtina, or
National Assembly, elected the aged Prince Milosch, who died very soon
afterwards. In 1861 his son, Prince Mihailo, succeeded, but in 1868 was
shot at Topschider, near Belgrade, through motives of personal
animosity. His cousin Milan, who was heir to the throne, was then in his
minority, and Servia was governed by a Regency of three persons.

During Milan’s reign there occurred, 1876-78, the war with Turkey and
the securing of four new departments, the recognition of the
independence of Servia by the Berlin Treaty, the proclamation of the
kingdom in 1882, the unfortunate war with Bulgaria in 1885, and the
promulgation of a new constitution which, with some slight modification,
is still in force. After the abdication of King Milan, his son Alexander
mounted the throne. His unfortunate matrimonial alliance with the
ambitious Draga, who quickly assumed authority, was soon responsible for
much discontent. Life became impossible in Servia owing to the
maladministration in every department, and the army revolted, with the
tragic and regrettable result that is so well known.

After the death of King Alexander in 1903, the Skupshtina elected the
son of Alexander Karageorgevitch as King under the title of Peter I.

With the present political acquisitions and the progress already made in
the highroad of civilisation, Servia has already obtained a high place
among civilised nations. But, alas! as the Servian author, M. Zrnitch,
has put it, the Servians are only free in the head—Servia—and the
arms—Montenegro. The other parts of their organism are still held in
thraldom by the foreigner.

While in Belgrade I was afforded an opportunity of visiting the
Skupshtina and being present at a somewhat heated debate. Just before my
arrival two deputies had, it was said, come to blows. All that I saw
there was most orderly, and certainly the speakers—even those in their
quaint brown peasant dress—were mostly eloquent.

Servia badly needs a new Parliament House. The present Skupshtina is a
large bare whitewashed building with two galleries, one for the
diplomats and Press, and the other for the public. In front of a
life-sized portrait of His Majesty sits the President, keeping order
with his bell, and on either side at baize-covered tables sit the
Ministers. The benches are set in horseshoe shape, and look very
uncomfortable. The deputies consist of all classes, from the wealthy
landowner to the peasant, and all receive fifteen francs a day expenses
while the House sits.

Plans have already been prepared for a new and handsome Parliament
House, which is to be built on a fine site behind the royal palace, and
it is believed the work will be commenced during the present year. The
sooner the National Assembly is properly housed the better, for the
present building is mostly of wood, old, rickety, and the reverse of
dignified. None are so alive to the urgent necessity of providing
comfortable quarters for the deliberations of the Skupshtina than His
Majesty himself, for it was he who explained to me what is intended.

After the revolution of June 2, 1903, the National Assembly convoked by
the Government of the kingdom of Servia gave the country, on June 15, a
new constitution, which was ratified three days later. The Skupshtina is
composed of deputies elected directly by the people, and its members,
during their office, cannot be sued or arrested without the consent of
the Skupshtina itself—save in the case of _flagrant delit_. Besides the
“Little Skupshtina,” which carries on the government of the country,
there is also the “Grand Skupshtina,” which consists of double the
number of deputies, and which is only summoned in exceptional
circumstances, namely, to elect the King; to elect regents; to decide
the succession of the throne; to deliberate upon any modification of the
constitution; to decide upon any cession or exchange of territory; or
when the King wishes to consult them. The King alone has the right to
choose or dismiss his Ministers.

In Servia there are 17 departments, 81 arrondissements, and 1571
communes. At the head of each department is a prefect nominated by the
King, at the head of each arrondissement a sous-prefect, and at the head
of each commune a mayor elected by the people.

Military service is compulsory, and the number of conscripts average
26,700 a year. The duration of service in the active army is for cavalry
and infantry two years, and eighteen months for other branches of the
service. I visited various barracks, and was afforded several
opportunities of inspecting the troops. Both officers and men seem
exceedingly smart and capable. Many of the officers had received their
military education in France, Germany, and Russia, while one artillery
officer I met had studied at Shoeburyness!

When the defensive forces are re-armed, as they will be completely
within the next twelve months, Europe will find in Servia a very capable
and well-trained army. Every Serb is a born fighter, and no detail is
being overlooked to render Servia’s defences up to date and complete.

Servia is not a country of great landowners. Apart from the property
held by the State, the land is almost wholly divided among peasant
proprietors. The law grants to every Servian peasant 2.8 hectares of
land, which cannot be sold to pay private debts. It is also forbidden
for cultivators to give bills of exchange. These two measures are of
great importance in preserving the land to the Servian peasant. The
country is a very rich agricultural one—perhaps one of the richest in
Europe. Yet one fact struck me as curious, namely, that in Belgrade one
cannot obtain any good milk, and all butter worth eating comes from
Budapest. There is a very great opening in Servia for dairy-farmers, a
branch of industry which, it seems, does not exist. The vines have, in
recent years, been all destroyed by the phylloxera, but they are being
rapidly replaced by the American variety. The country around the
arrondissements of Smederevo, Golubac, Ram, and Krayina are particularly
noted for good grapes and excellent wine.

[Illustration: In “The Kalemegdan”: Belgrade.]

[Illustration: The Market Place: Belgrade.]

Tobacco is a monopoly of the State. It is purchased upon a tariff fixed
by special commission, and is of well-known quality and peculiarly
adapted for the manufacture of cigarettes. The departments where it is
principally cultivated are Vranya, Krayina, Nisch, d’Uzice, and
Kragooyevac, while in other parts of Servia the Turkish varieties are
grown with great success, and for aroma will compare well with the
tobacco of Albania or Kavala. Not only is sufficient tobacco grown in
Servia to supply the wants of the country, but the quantities exported
are increasing year by year. A favoured few Englishmen, and especially
diplomats in various parts of Europe—who know the excellence of the
special quality of Servian cigarettes—have them direct from Belgrade.
Cigarettes bought for export cost one-half the price they do for
consumption in Servia.

Marmalade and _slivovitza_—an _eau-de-vie_ made of prunes—are also two
articles manufactured in Servia and largely exported, about three
million francs’ worth of the former, and two hundred thousand francs’
worth of the latter being sent out of the country annually.

There are immense forests in various parts of the country with a great
wealth of timber unexploited, as a glance at any good map of Servia will
show, while the sportsman will find there plenty of game of every kind,
from bear, lynx, wolf, and such-like animals, down to the quail, pigeon,
partridge, pheasant, and woodcock. The whole country teems with game,
and the only prohibitions are upon the stag, deer, chamois, and hen
pheasants. There are many sporting clubs, the chief one being in
Belgrade, where a paper is also published called _Le Chasseur_.

Servia’s mineral wealth is well known to geologists. Gold, in diluvial
and alluvial deposits, is being worked at Timok, at Pek, and at other
places, while cinnabar is found at Avala, near Belgrade, and in the
villages of Brajici, Bare, and Donja Tresnica. At Podrinye, at Lyuta
Strana, at Zuce, at Crveni Breg, in the region of Avala, at Rudnik, at
Kopaonik, at Djurina Sreca there is lead; at Zavlaca and Kucajna, zinc;
and at Povlen, Suvobor, Cemerno, Aldinac, Majdanpek, Bor in Timok and
Rtanj, large deposits of copper. Arsenic is found in various regions,
but principally near Donja Tresnica, in the department of Podrinye;
while antimony is known to exist in the Zajaca region. Rich iron is
waiting to be exploited upon the Kopaonik, in Vlasina, Rudna Glava,
Crnajka (department of Krajina), on the Vencac, in the centre of Servia,
and on the Boranja (in Podrinye); while there is coal in places too
innumerable to mention in this work.

All this enormous mineral wealth might well be exploited by British
capital. The Servian Government are, however, very careful to whom they
give concessions, and will not entertain, for a single moment, any
application, unless the applicant is properly introduced and can give
undeniable proof of his _bona fides_. Therefore the adventurer who
thinks he will, without capital, be able to make a “good thing” will
find himself sadly disappointed. The Government is extremely anxious to
receive _bona-fide_ proposals, and as His Majesty himself informed me,
will grant concessions, but only to firms or companies who mean serious
and legitimate business.

The Servian State is owner of all the subsoil of its territory, and can
give what rights it thinks proper to foreigners to prospect and work.

British capitalists would do well to make inquiries, for, from certain
information I gathered in Belgrade, I have no hesitation in saying that
great returns await those who commence serious mining operations in that
rich and inexhaustible field.

As the future wealth of Servia will depend to a large extent on the
exploitation of her mineral resources, and as Englishmen must, ere long,
be interested in her mines—as they are in mines all over the world—a few
facts concerning the Mining Law of Servia may not be out of place here.

The Government grants two kinds of rights to make researches, the
“simple right” and the “exclusive right.” The former is given for one
year, and may be extended to two years, and is limited to the three
communes indicated. The second lasts a year, but is renewable each year
as long as required, and it gives a right to explore over 500,000 square
metres of mining field.

The State gives concessions for mines for fifty years upon a sufficient
number of mining-fields each of 100,000 square metres, the boundaries of
which are fixed by a special commission. To obtain a concession it must
first be proved that there are undoubted traces of minerals; that the
capital is sufficient, and a plan of the proposed works has to be
furnished. The concessionaire, after fifteen years of uninterrupted
work, becomes proprietor, but he must continue to pay the mining duties,
and of course conform to the Mining Law.

Both the prospector and the concessionaire are obliged to work
regularly, take proper precautions for the well-being and personal
safety of their workpeople, report annually upon work executed, and
furnish each year plans for next year’s work. There must be no mining
beneath roads, water-courses, buildings, or cemeteries.

All rights of research and all concessions are lost if the specified
work is not executed within the first year, or is interrupted without a
reason approved by the Minister, or by bankruptcy.

The State, in order to encourage industry, favours the importation of
all machinery and material for use in mines, as well as the exportation
of the ore obtained, and gives many other advantages to the
concessionaire.

Of late, Belgrade has been overrun with foreign concession-hunters, most
of them of the adventurer type. I met several of them in Belgrade. In my
conversation with the Ministers I quickly learnt that the Government,
fully alive to the great mineral resources of their country, and
confident in the great wealth that must in a few years accrue, will have
absolutely nothing to do with any person who comes to them without
introduction.

In Belgrade, I repeat, the doors are closed to the irresponsible
concession-hunter, but at once open to anyone who on being introduced
can show his _bona fides_ and that he has capital behind him.

In the course of my inquiries into the mineral wealth I had a number of
conversations with Mr. J. R. Finney, Ass. I. M. & M., an English mining
engineer who has spent seventeen years in prospecting and working mines
in Servia.

No one knows more about mines and traces of minerals in the country than
he.

He pointed out to me that the mineral deposits of Servia have been
worked to a very great extent from very early times, as the remains of
Roman and Venetian works prove and the enormous slag-heaps found in
various parts of the country. He himself has on many occasions found,
while prospecting, rude ancient implements, bones, etc. Of the ancient
Roman workings, copper, galena, and silver were obtained at Kopaonik; at
Rudnik, lead, silver, and zinc were mined; at Kucajna, gold, silver,
zinc, and coal, while alluvial gold is to be found all along the Pek
River, and especially where it joins the Danube. This gold has, he said,
evidently been worked down in course of time from a rich quartz reef
which is known by certain persons, including himself, to exist.

At the Rebel copper mine, which Mr. Finney himself discovered, he found
ancient workings that had been shored up with timber, but so long ago
that the wood was petrified! Again, the wood was pine, which does not
now exist in the forests. The latter are all beeches, and it is known
that in course of long ages beeches kill the pines. At the mine in
question is an extensive copper-smelting works, and a very large
percentage of metal is obtained. All over this same district Mr. Finney
has prospected, and declares that in the mountains of Medvednick and
Povlen there are large deposits of lead, copper, silver, and antimony
all awaiting exploitation.

Some very important copper mines and smelting works are at Maydan Pek,
and have been worked at a good profit for years, while at Bor there has
been erected a large smelting works, which are capable of producing ten
tons of copper daily. Large deposits of antimony exist, to Mr. Finney’s
knowledge, at Zajitchar and Krupanj.

“I quite admit,” said Mr. Finney, as we were chatting, “that some mines
in Servia have not been successful. The bulk of them have been
over-capitalised. Take, as an instance, one company with £300,000
capital, which left £20,000 for working. The consequence is that the sum
at disposal has not been sufficient to develop the mine or to work
sufficient to pay interest on £280,000.

“Again, in many cases men unacquainted with any foreign language, or
with the customs of the country, have been sent out here to manage, and
with instructions from a board in London utterly ignorant of the
requirements of the case. As an instance of this, a certain company that
I could name sent out to Servia six managers in three years. In such a
case, with a manager dependent upon interpreters and ignorant of the
people, the price of labour and materials rises from 200 to 300 per
cent. I have known these prices to be paid. Again, there is some little
reform needed in the mining laws, and the Government would be well
advised if they compelled the communes to put the roads in better
repair. Transport is at present somewhat difficult, and if the communes
put the roads in order they would, in the long-run, greatly benefit by
the opening up of the country. Such,” Mr. Finney added, “are some of the
reasons why foreign mining undertakings in Servia have not been
altogether successful in the past. But for the future there is great
hope, and English capitalists will do well to regard Servia as a field
where good profits may easily be made.”

                      ----------------------------

       AN ALPHABETICAL LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL SERVIAN PLACE-NAMES

 ALEXANDROVATZ             Chief town of the arrondissement of Koznitza,
                             on the river of that name.
 ALEXINATZ                 Chief town of the department of the same
                             name, at the junction of the Morawa with
                             the Morawfitz. 6000 inhabitants. Copper
                             mines. The monastery of Sant Stepan is in
                             close proximity.
 ALEXINATZ                 Department with arrondissement of 30
                             communes.
 ARANGYELOVATZ             Chief town of Jassenitza, department of
                             Kragooyevatz. 1000 inhabitants. Source of
                             Boukovik mineral waters. Watering-place
                             much frequented from  May till October.
 ARILIE                    An arrondissement of 23 communes in Oujitze,
                             valley of the Morawa Serbe.
 ARILIE                    Chief town of arrondissement of that name,
                             department of Oujitze.
 AZANJA                    Town in Jassenitza. 4500 inhabitants.
 AZBOUKOVATZ               Arrondissement of 38 communes in Podrinié.
 BANIA                     Watering-place very frequented, in the
                             department of Alexinatz. Ruins of a Roman
                             bath and of a feudal castle. View upon
                             Pyramid of Rtanje, and one of the most
                             picturesque places in Servia.
 BANIA                     Hot-water springs an hour from Nisch.
 BANIA-YOSCHANITZA         Chief town of Yoschanitza, in Kruschevatz.
 BELAVIA                   Mineral-water springs in the arrondissement
                             of Yagodina.
 BELIVNIA                  Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Prokoupatz, department of Toplitza.
 BIELA-PALANKA             Arrondissement in Pirot of 44 communes.
 BIELITZA                  Small tributary of the Morawa. Also name of
                             an arrondissement.
 BLATO-LUZNITZA            Chief town of Luznitza, department of Pirot.
 BOGATITCH                 Chief town in the arrondissement of Matchva,
                             in Schabatz district.
 BOLIEVATZ                 Chief town of an arrondissement in the
                             department of Tzrna Reka, at foot of Mount
                             Ratni.
 BOLIEVATZ                 An arrondissement of the Zrnarjeka.
 BRESTOVATZ                Station between Nisch and Vranya.
 BRZA-PALANKA              Chief town of an arrondissement in Kraina, on
                             the Danube.
 BRZA-PALANKA              Arrondissement on the Roumanian frontier with
                             20 communes.
 DERVEN                    Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Sverlichka, department of Kniajevatz.
                             Monastery of S. Arangel in the vicinity.
 DESPOTOVATZ               Arrondissement with 33 communes in Tchoupria.
 DJEP                      Station between Nisch and Vrania.
 DJUNIS                    Station on the Morawa.
 DOBRA                     Coal-mine on the Danube between Golubatz and
                             Dolni Milanovatz.
 DOBRITSH                  Arrondissement in Toplitza with 85 communes.
 DOLNI DUCHNIK             Chief town in the arrondissement of Zaplania,
                             department of Nisch.
 DOLNI MILANOVATZ          Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Poreschka-Rieka, in Kraina, on the Danube.
                             Fine forests; stone and lignite in the
                             vicinity.
 DRAGATCHEVO               Name of an arrondissement of which Gutscha is
                             the chief town, in Tchatchak. 55 communes.
 DRINA                     Tributary of the Save between Bosnia and the
                             Servian frontier. Excellent trout-fishing.
 GAMSIGRAD                 A locality near Zaitchar. Close by upon a
                             plateau near Timok are most interesting
                             ruins of a Roman fortress. One of the best
                             preserved ruins in Servia.
 GLEDIKJ                   A plateau south of Kragouievatz.
 GOLEMO-SELO               Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Polianitza, in Vrania.
 GOLIA                     Mountains on the frontier of Novi-Bazar.
 GOLUBATZ                  Arrondissement of 29 communes.
 GOLUBATZ                  Mining centre on the Danube.
 GOLUBINIE                 Mountains in Kraina.
 GORNI-MILANOVATZ          Chief town of the arrondissement of Takovo
                             and of the department of Rudnik. 3000
                             inhabitants. School of commerce.
 GRDELITZA                 Station on the Nisch-Vrania railway, south of
                             Vlatchotinza.
 GREATCH                   Station near Alexinatz, on the Belgrade-Nisch
                             railway.
 GROTZKA                   Small river, which gives its name to an
                             arrondissement of 17 communes.
 GROTZKA                   Town on the Danube, near Belgrade.
 GRUJA                     Tributary of the Morawa Srbska, which gives
                             its name to an arrondissement of 63
                             communes.
 GUBEREVATZ                Important traces of minerals 35 kilometres
                             from Belgrade.
 GUTSCHA                   Chief town of Dragatchevo, department of
                             Tchatchak. Splendid pastures.
 GUTSCHEVO-BORANJA         Mountains in the department of Podrinie.
 HASSAN-PACHA              Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Jassenitza, department of Semendria. 3200
                             inhabitants.
 IBAR                      Tributary of the Morawa Srbska.
 IVANYITZA                 Chief town of Moravitza, department of
                             Oujitze. 200 inhabitants. Wheat-growing.
 JADAR                     Tributary of the Drina, which gives its name
                             to an arrondissement of 40 communes. Chief
                             town, Loznitza.
 KAMENITZA                 Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Podgaratz, in Valievo.
 KATSCHER                  Arrondissement, of which the chief town is
                             Rudnik. 38 communes.
 KLADOVA                   Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Kljoutscha, department of Kraina, on the
                             Danube. 2706 inhabitants.
 KLIOUTSCHA                Arrondissement, of which the chief town is
                             Kladova, north of the Kraina.
 KNIAJEVATZ                Chief town of the department of that name at
                             the foot of the Balkans. Growing of cereals
                             and a school of commerce.
 KOLUBARA                  Tributary of the Save. Gives its name to two
                             arrondissements.
 KOPAONIK                  Mountains to the south of the Dinaric Alps.
 KORMAN                    Station ten kilometres north of Alexinatz.
 KOSSMAY                   Mountain which gives its name to an
                             arrondissement of which the chief town is
                             Iopot, department of Belgrade. 26 communes.
 KOSTLENIK                 Mountain in the department of Rudnik.
 KOURSCHOUMLIE             Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Kossanitza, on the Turkish frontier.
                             Country noted for its wines.
 KOUTSCHEVO                Chief town of the arrondissement of Svidje,
                             on the Pek. Coal mines.
 KOZIERITZA                Chief town of the arrondissement of Tzerna
                             Gora, department of Oujitza.
 KOZNITZA                  Watercourse and tributary of the Morawa
                             Srbska, which gives its name to an
                             arrondissement of 92 communes in the
                             department of Kruschevatz.
 KRAGOUIEVATZ              Chief town of the department of that name,
                             and ancient capital of Servia. Situated on
                             the Lepnitza. 13,000 inhabitants. Contains
                             a large library, a gun-factory, and
                             powder-magazine. Potteries and stone
                             quarries. Excellent wine grown here.
 KRAINA                    Department in the north-east of Servia. Chief
                             town, Negotin.
 KRALIEVO                  Chief town of the arrondissement of the same
                             name, department of Tchatchak. 4200
                             inhabitants. Lead and iron mines. Military
                             school.
 KROUPANIE                 Town in the department of Loznitza. Lead,
                             zinc, and antimony mines.
 KRUSCHEVATZ               Chief town of the arrondissement and
                             department of that name, with 6200
                             inhabitants. Ancient residence of the Tzars
                             of Servia. Vine culture.
 LAPOVO                    Junction of the railway Belgrade-Nisch with
                             the line to Kragouievatz.
 LEBANE                    Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Yablonitza, at the junction of the Medvedja
                             and Buguecka.
 LEPENATZ                  A series of plateaux in the south-west, near
                             the environs of Nisch.
 LEPNITZA                  Tributary of the Morawa, which gives its name
                             to the arrondissement of which Ratscha is
                             the chief town. 40 communes.
 LESKOVATZ                 Chief town of an arrondissement of that name
                             in the department of Nisch. Monastery of S.
                             Radni in vicinity. Arrondissement contains
                             77 communes.
 LIPOVATSCHA               Small river in the arrondissement of Ratscha.
 LOZNITZA                  Chief town of the department of Podrinie.
                             4000 inhabitants. School of commerce.
 LUBOVIA                   Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Asboukovatz, upon the Drina.
 LUZNITZA                  An arrondissement with 54 communes in the
                             department of Pirot.
 MAIDANPEK                 Important mining centre 30 kilometres from
                             Dolni-Milanovatz, on the Danube. Iron and
                             copper. Vast forests.
 MASSOURITZA               An arrondissement on the Bulgarian frontier,
                             department of Vrania. 43 communes.
 MATSCHWA                  An arrondissement of 24 communes in Schabatz
                             district, north-east of Servia.
 MIONITZA                  Chief town of the arrondissement of Kolubara,
                             department of Valievo.
 MLAVA                     Tributary of the Danube which gives its name
                             to an arrondissement of which the chief
                             town is Petrovatz. 32 communes.
 MORAWA                    Chief river in Servia, and by its tributary
                             the Morawa which rises in the Yavor
                             mountains, waters much territory in the
                             south-east of the kingdom. There is an
                             arrondissement of the same name in the
                             department of Rudnik, with 38 communes.
 MORAWITZA                 Tributary of the Morawa which gives its name
                             to two arrondissements, one of 31 communes,
                             the chief town of which is Bania, in
                             Alexinatz, and the other, of which Yvanitza
                             is the chief town, in Oujitza, with 149
                             communes.
 NEGOTIN                   A town of 6000 inhabitants, in Kraina, East
                             Servia. Noted for its wines.
 NISCHAVA                  Tributary of the Morawa, which gives its name
                             to the arrondissement of which Pirot is the
                             chief town. 65 communes.
 NOVI HAN                  Chief town of the arrondissement of Timok, in
                             the Tchiprovatz Mountains, on the Bulgarian
                             frontier.
 OBRENOVATZ                Chief town of the arrondissement of Possava,
                             department of Valievo, on the Tamnava, near
                             its confluence with the Danube. 3000
                             inhabitants.
 OMOLJE                    Mountains. Highest, 3500 metres, in the
                             department of Pojarevatz.
 ORATSCHA                  A town in Semendria, upon the small river
                             Rallya. Also the name of an arrondissement
                             of 14 communes.
 OROPSI                    Mineral springs near Belgrade.
 OUB                       Chief town of the arrondissement of Tamnava,
                             in Valievo.
 OUJITZE                   Town of 8000 inhabitants in the department of
                             the same name. Wine and school of commerce.
 OVTSCHAR                  Mountains near Tchatchak. Sulphur  baths.
 PARATCHIN                 Chief town of an arrondissement of that name
                             on the Zanitza, department of Tchoupria.
                             The monastery of  S. Pelka is not far
                             distant.
 PETCHENIKOTZA             Town at the confluence of the Jablonitza and
                             the Morawa.
 PETROVATZ                 Chief town of the arrondissement of Mlava, in
                             Pojarewatz.
 PIROT                     Chief town of the department of that name in
                             the south-east of Servia. 14,000
                             inhabitants.
 PODGORATZ                 Mines of iron, copper, and lead, in Valievo.
                             Lithographic stone is quarried.
 PODGORIE                  Arrondissement of 29 communes in Valievo.
 PODRINYE                  A department in the west of Servia. Chief
                             town, Loznitza.
 PODUNAVLYE                Arrondissement of 25 communes in Smederevo.
 POJAREVATZ                Chief town of an arrondissement of that name.
                             13,000 inhabitants. Mining centre. School
                             of agriculture. The scene of the famous
                             Congress of 1718.
 POJEGA                    Chief town of an arrondissement of that name,
                             department of Oujitza. The arrondissement
                             contains 52 communes.
 POLYANITZA                An arrondissement on the Turkish frontier,
                             department of Vrania.
 PORESCHKA                 Tributary of the Danube in a deep valley
                             between the Pekska and the Misosch
                             mountains. It gives its name to an
                             arrondissement of 11 communes, in Kraina.
 PORTES DE FER (GYERDAP)   “The Iron Gates” of the Danube, or passage
                             between the Balkans at the point where the
                             river leaves Servia. There is also a small
                             town of 3000 inhabitants. In the mountains
                             in the vicinity the wild cherry is found.
                             It is very rare, and is much sought after
                             for the manufactory of expensive furniture.
 POSSAVA                   An arrondissement of 27 communes in Belgrade.
                             Also one in the department of Valievo.
 POSSAVO-TAMNAVA           Arrondissement of 54 communes in the
                             department of Schabatz.
 POTSERIE                  Arrondissement of 34 communes, of which the
                             chief town is Schabatz.
 PRECHILOVATZ              Chief town of an arrondissement of that name
                             in Alexinatz.
 PREILLINA                 Chief town of the arrondissement of the
                             Morawa, a few kilometres from Tchatchak.
 PRIBOI                    Town on the railway Nisch-Vrania.
 PRILIKA                   Mineral springs in the arrondissement of
                             Oujitze.
 PROKOUPATZ                Arrondissement of 104 communes in department
                             of Toplitza.
 PROKOUPLIE                Chief town of Toplitza and of the
                             arrondissement of Dobritsch.
 PSCHINIE                  An arrondissement of 89 communes in Vrania.
 RADJEVINA                 Chief town of Radjevo, in Podrinie, on the
                             Bosnian frontier. Lead mines.
 RADJEVO                   Arrondissement of 32 communes.
 RADOUYEVATZ               A town on the Danube at the point where the
                             right bank ceases to be in Servia.
 RAJAN                     Chief town of the arrondissement of that
                             name, in Alexinatz. The Monastery of S.
                             Roman is in the vicinity.
 RALLYA                    Station on the Belgrade-Nisch line. Important
                             mining centre. Also the name of a small
                             river.
 RAMA                      Arrondissement of 31 communes, of which
                             Veliko Graditcha is the chief town.
 RASCHKA                   Chief town in the arrondissement of
                             Stoudenitza, department of Tchatchak, at
                             the foot of Mount Golia.
 RATSCHA                   Chief town of the arrondissement of Lepnitza,
                             in Kragouievatz. Also the name of an
                             arrondissement of 28 communes in Oujitze.
 REKOVATZ                  Chief town of the arrondissement of Levatch,
                             in Yagodina.
 RESNIK                    Station on the Belgrade-Nisch railway.
 RESSAVA                   Tributary of the Morawa which gives its name
                             to an arrondissement of 24 communes in
                             Tchoupria.
 RIPANIE                   Station and mine on the line Belgrade-Nisch.
 RTANIE                    A pyramidical mountain of 3900 metres in the
                             arrondissement of Alexinatz.
 RUDNIK                    Chief town of the arrondissement of Kastcher,
                             department of Rudnik; also the name of a
                             range of mountains in the centre of Servia.
 RYBAR                     Mineral springs in Kruschevatz.
 SAVA                      A tributary of the Danube which joins the
                             latter at Belgrade.
 SCHABATZ                  A town of 11,000 inhabitants upon the Save,
                             capital of a department of that name.
 SCHORNIK                  A plateaux to the west of Oujitze.
 SCHUMADIA                 A vast forest extending through the
                             departments of Belgrade and Rudnik.
 SEMENDRIA                 Chief town of a department of that name,
                             situated on the Danube, with 7500
                             inhabitants. Vine culture.
 SIKIRITZA                 A station between Belgrade and Nisch. Lignite
                             is known to exist here in large quantities.
 SIKOLIE                   A mining centre in the Kraina.
 SLATIBOR                  A chain of mountains forming part of the
                             Dinaric Alps separating Servia and Rascie
                             (Novi Bazar). Also the name of an
                             arrondissement of 30 communes in Oujitze.
 SMRDAN-BARA               Excellent sulphur springs at the confluence
                             of the Drina and the Save in Loznitza. Very
                             picturesque.
 SOPOT                     Chief town on the arrondissement of Kossmai,
                             department of Belgrade.
 STALATZ                   The junction of the railway
                             Kruschevatz-Oujitze and the line
                             Belgrade-Nisch.
 STANISCHITZA              High plateaux in Kruschevatz.
 STIG                      An arrondissement of 13 communes in
                             Pojarevatz, the chief town being
                             Koutschevo.
 STUDENITZA                Tributary of the Ibar, which joins it between
                             the mountains Iakowo and Radotschewo. It
                             gives its name to an arrondissement of 144
                             communes in Tchatchak. The chief town is
                             Ratschka, near which is the celebrated
                             monastery of Tsarska Lavra, built in the
                             twelfth century by the orders of Krale
                             Stefan Nemania, who became a monk under the
                             name of Simeon. The monastery, in the
                             Slavonic style, Orthodox and Byzantine, is
                             entirely constructed of white marble, and
                             is of marvellous beauty.
 SVERLICHKA                Arrondissement of 40 communes, the chief town
                             of which is Derven, in Kniajevatz.
 SVILAINATZ                Chief town of Ressava, upon the river of that
                             name in the department of Tchoupria.
 TAKOVO                    Arrondissement of 43 communes in Rudnik.
 TAMNAVA                   A tributary of the Save which gives its name
                             to an arrondissement of 42 communes in
                             Valievo.
 TCHAITINA                 Chief town of the arrondissement of Slatibor,
                             near the Bosnian frontier, twenty
                             kilometres from Mokragora.
 TCHATCHAK                 Chief town of a department of that name,
                             situated upon the Morawa Serbe. 4200
                             inhabitants.
 TCHOPITZ                  Chief town of Kolubara, department of
                             Belgrade.
 TCHOUPRIA                 Chief town of a department of that name,
                             situated upon the Morawa at its confluence
                             with the Kamenitza. 5200 inhabitants.
                             Lignite.
 TEMNITCH                  A department with capital of the same name.
 TEMNITCHKA                Mountains in the south of Yagodina which give
                             their names to an arrondissement of 43
                             communes.
 TIMOK                     A river which rises near Biela Palanka, runs
                             to the north, and falls into the Danube a
                             little below Radouyevatz, after serving as
                             frontier to Servia and Bulgaria for 50
                             kilometres. The name also of an
                             arrondissement of 20 communes of which
                             Novi-Han is the chief town, in the
                             department of Kniajevatz.
 TOPLITZA                  A river rising in the Kopaonik mountains, and
                             falls into the Morawa near Nisch. It also
                             gives its name to a department of which
                             Prokouplie is the chief town.
 TOPOLA                    A small town in Kragouievatz. 3100
                             inhabitants.
 TOPSCHIDER                First station on the line Belgrade-Nisch.
                             Royal villa and gardens. Also mining
                             centre. The name of a small river falling
                             into the Save.
 TRNAVA                    An arrondissement of 29 communes, the chief
                             town of which is Tchatchak.
 TRSTENIK                  A town of 2000 inhabitants, situated on the
                             Morawa Srbska, in Kruschevatz. Manufacture
                             of millstones. Also the name of an
                             arrondissement of 38 communes.
 TZERNAGORA                A mountain which gives its name to an
                             arrondissement of 126 communes in Oujitze.
 UMKA                      A town on the Save, department of Belgrade.
 VALIEVO                   Chief town of the department and
                             arrondissement (of 62 communes) of the same
                             name. 7500 inhabitants. Lithographic stone.
                             Town lit by electricity by an English
                             concessionaire, Mr. J. R. Finney.
 VARVARIN                  A town in the department of Yagodina. Stalatz
                             station.
 VELIKA-LUKANIA            A town at the foot of Mount Radotschina,
                             department of Pirot. The monastery of S.
                             Aranghel is near.
 VELIKA-PLANA              The junction of railways between
                             Belgrade-Nisch and Semendria.
 VELIKI-POPOVITCH          Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Despotovatz, situated on the Retsava.
 VELIKO-GRADISHTE          A town at the confluence of the Pek and
                             Danube. 4016 inhabitants. Wheat-growing.
 VERSCHKA-TCHOUKA          Mountain between Novi-Han and Zaitchar. Rich
                             coal mines.
 VIZZOTSCHKA               An arrondissement in Pirot containing 26
                             communes.
 VLADIMIRTSI               Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Possavo-Tamnava, in Schabatz.
 VLADITCHIN-HAN            Small station on the Nisch-Vrania line.
 VLASCHKA                  Fifth station from Belgrade, towards Nisch.
 VLASSINA                  Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Mazouritza, in Vrania, on the Bosnian
                             frontier.
 VLASSOTINZE               A town situate on the Vlassina-Vignes, in
                             Nisch. Also the name of an arrondissement
                             of 51 communes.
 VRANIA                    Chief town of a department of that name in
                             South Servia, on the Nisch-Uskub line. Vine
                             culture. At Bania, in the vicinity, mineral
                             springs.
 VRATCHAR                  Arrondissement of 20 communes in the
                             department of Belgrade.
 WRATARNITZA               A plateau to the east of Zrna-Rieka,
                             Bulgarian frontier.
 WRNTZE                    Excellent mineral springs upon the road from
                             Kralievo to Trstenik, in the arrondissement
                             of Kruschevatz.
 YABAR                     Chief town in the arrondissement of Morawa.
                             Abundant lignite.
 YABLANITZA                A river falling into the Morawa at
                             Brestovatz-Tchetina, and giving its name to
                             an arrondissement of 58 communes,
                             department of Toplitza.
 YADAR                     A tributary of the Drina which gives its name
                             to an arrondissement of 40 communes in
                             Podrinie.
 YAGODINA                  Chief town of the department of that name and
                             of the arrondissement of Bielitza, upon the
                             Constantinople road. 5000 inhabitants.
                             Station on the Belgrade-Nisch line.
 YASSENITZA                A tributary of the Morawa, which gives its
                             name to an arrondissement of 27 communes in
                             Kragouievatz. Also a small tributary of the
                             Medjloudje and the name of an
                             arrondissement of 15 communes in Semendria.
 YAVOR                     Mountains on the western frontier of Servia.
 YBAR                      Tributary of the Morawa Serbe, which it joins
                             near Kralievo.
 YOSCHANITZA               Small tributary of the Ibar which gives its
                             name to an arrondissement of 71 communes in
                             Kruschevatz.
 YVANITZA                  Chief town of the arrondissement of
                             Morawitza, in Oujitze. 2000 inhabitants.
                             Cereals.
 ZAGLAV                    An arrondissement of 51 communes, of which
                             Kniajevatz is the chief town.
 ZAGOUBITZA                Chief town of the arrondissement of Omolje,
                             upon the Mlava. The celebrated monastery of
                             S. Giorgiak is in the vicinity.
 ZAITCHAR                  One of the arrondissements of the Zrna Rieka.
                             25 communes. Also name of the capital of
                             the department. 7000 inhabitants. Coal
                             mines.
 ZAPLANIE                  An arrondissement of 55 communes in the
                             department of Nisch.




                                BULGARIA




[Illustration: HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE FERDINAND OF BULGARIA.]




                               CHAPTER I
                            SOFIA OF TO-DAY

At the Bulgarian frontier—A chat with M. Etienne, French ex-Minister of
    War—Evening in Sofia—A city of rapid progress—Engaging peasants for
    Earl’s Court Exhibition—Amusing episodes—Social life in Sofia—The
    diplomats’ club—The Bulgarian Government grant me special facilities
    for investigation.


The Orient Express—that train of dusty _wagons-lits_ which three days a
week gives communication between Ostend and the East—had just passed the
Bulgarian frontier at Tzaribrod, and my passport had been examined and
stamped by a keen-eyed little man in black.

I was sitting in the dining-car with a very distinguished French
statesman, M. Etienne, ex-Minister of War, and we had been chatting for
several hours as the train wound through the defiles of the Servian
mountains.

A diplomat’s wife, with four pet spaniels, on her way, I believe, from
Japan to the Turkish capital, was seated at the next table to ours. She
had ordered coffee, for which she paid with a thousand-franc French
note! The takings of the “pudding-car” of the “Orient” must be
considerable, for the _maître d’hôtel_ promptly cashed the note—nine
“one-hundreds,” some French gold, silver, and copper—and received a few
centimes as a tip! It was my first quaint experience in Bulgaria. Mark
Twain with his million-pound-note should come here. Curiously enough, I
afterwards met the diplomat’s wife in Constantinople.

Entering Sofia from the station, the traveller is at first sadly
disappointed. The place looks dismal and half finished. There are wide
roads and boulevards laid out, with scarcely a house in them. Your cab
suddenly turns a corner. The high pointed minaret of a mosque comes into
view, and lo! you are in a wide boulevard, which would really do credit
to Brussels. You pass a many-domed building, the Cathedral, and
presently a pretty garden behind railings, and a long handsome building
with sentries at the entrance-gate—the Palace of Prince Ferdinand. You
are in modern Sofia.

After a wash at the hotel, I went to the Palace, signed my name in His
Royal Highness’s visiting-book, and then went forth to wander in the
streets.

It was now already dark. In the trees of the central boulevard thousands
of rooks were cawing and circling above, disturbed by the lights and
movement of the street. Men were shouting the evening newspapers in
strident voices, and one could almost imagine oneself back on the
Boulevard des Italiens at the absinthe hour, with the camelots crying
“_V’la la Presse!_” Only, in Paris, rooks do not nest in the streets,
nor do the watchmakers have twenty-four inches of space and a chair in
the windows of the smaller cafés. A walk along any of the principal
streets at once shows the Bulgar to be a fighter, for the display of
arms of all kinds, even to the modern Browning automatic pistol, is
immense.

Here, one is really in the Balkans. The last official census gives
sixty-six Englishmen and forty-six Englishwomen in the whole of
Bulgaria. I met six only. Uniforms, upon Russian models, are
everywhere—the peaked cap, the grey overcoat, the big revolver. Men in
European dress jostle with peasants in linen blouses, round astrachan
caps, and drab blankets around them, or others in sheepskin jackets with
the wool inside, all with the inevitable round Balkan cap of astrachan.
The Turk, too, is quite at home and friendly with the Christian, and
modern progress is typified by the electric trams whizzing and clanging
everywhere.

[Illustration: Peasants in Sofia Market Place.]

[Illustration: The Old Mosque: Sofia.]

Sofia is essentially a town of progress. During the past eighteen months
whole streets of new villas have sprung up upon its outskirts, and such
a rush has there lately been for building plots that our Foreign
Office—who want to build a new Legation—are unable to get any decent
site in a central position. Sofia is just now in the transition stage.
Great new public buildings and fine boulevards are springing up
everywhere. There is a beautiful new theatre, a new post office, a new
Agricultural Bank, and hosts of minor structures, all spacious and well
built, which, in themselves, show Bulgaria to be a country of rapid
advancement.

Unlike some other Balkan countries, there seems no lack of money here.
Just now, for example, it is proposed to expend a little matter of
fourteen million francs upon roads in the Principality, and the cost of
the new market-halls and other buildings will probably be prodigious.

But the Bulgar is essentially a thrifty person. During the past twenty
years he has transformed his capital from a wretched little Turkish town
into a really handsome city. In twenty years to come, at the present
rate of progress, it will be the Brussels of the East, for it is
modelled upon the same plan.

Sofia is a city of quaint contrasts. Fine modern shops, where one can
obtain the latest Parisian perfumes, the latest French _modes_, or
expensive table delicacies, are hopelessly mixed up with the Turkish
stalls where sallow-faced men are squatting at work, or sitting
pensively at the seat of custom. The Sofia tradesman likes to expose his
wares, whatever they may be, in the street, for in that he still retains
the trace of the trade manners of the Turk. The pavements of the main
streets are heaped with wares—fish in barrels, meat, groceries, live
fowls, live pigs tied to lamp-posts, and among it all jostle the
passers-by.

The broad Maria Luisa Ulitza, the Dondukoff Boulevard, or the Pirotska
Ulitza are, on a Friday, the market-day, crowded with peasants in the
most picturesque costume of all the Balkans. Until a year or two ago the
skirts and head-dresses were of white linen embroidered, but in these
modern times the women dye all their white clothes a pale blue.
Therefore they all seem to wear the same delicate shade. The married
women have their heads covered with a pale blue handkerchief, and wear a
heavy silver girdle; but the village maidens all have their hair parted
in the middle and hanging in a hundred small plaits with sequins down
their backs, while over the left ear they wear a bunch of fresh flowers,
which gives them a most coquettish appearance. The skirt is short,
always hand-embroidered, and sometimes studded with gold sequins, while
over all is worn a short jacket of sheepskin with the wool inside,
rendering them somewhat podgy.

The men from the country, a fine tall race, wear embroidered costumes,
the jackets of dark stuff flowered in pale blue and ornamented with
hundreds of pearl buttons, tight white trousers embroidered at the
knees, and the inevitable round cap, without which no Bulgar is
complete.

I spent one amusing morning with Mr. James Bourchier, the well-known
Balkan correspondent of the _Times_, who is six months each year
resident in Sofia. He was on the local committee of the Balkan
Exhibition at Earl’s Court while I was on the London committee, and our
mission was to discover in the market some good-looking peasant girls to
go to the wilds of West Kensington. He had already been to several
villages, but the girls, he said, were rather chary of going so far from
home, even though assured by their local Mayor of their well-being and
safe return.

On the particular day of our visit to the market my journalistic friend
had arranged to meet the Mayor of one of the neighbouring villages—a
peasant—and with his aid try induce some of the best-looking girls to
grace the Bulgarian Section of the Exhibition. The village Mayor being
prevented from joining us, we determined to start upon a voyage of
discovery ourselves.

It was a rather formidable undertaking. We, however, spent an amusing
morning; but though we talked with many comely girls with flowers in
their hair, we somehow were unable to impress any of them with the
advantages of a free trip to London. Unfortunately, they did not take
us at all seriously; there was a good deal of tittering at our
proposals, and the market with its vegetables, its sucking-pigs on
strings, and its turkeys tied head downwards on cross-sticks, was
drawn blank. We could only hope that next Friday, with the presence of
the confidence-inspiring Mayor, we might be more successful.

[Illustration:

  HIS EXCELLENCY DR. DIMITRI STANCIOFF,
  Bulgarian Minister of Foreign Affairs.
]

As a matter of fact, a few days later, accompanied by my friend, M.
Dimitri Stancioff, of the Commercial Department of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, and M. Mandersheff, another functionary from the same
Ministry, we took carriages out to the picturesque village of Vladaja,
some seventeen kilometres from Sofia on the broad highroad that leads to
Kustendil and Macedonia. The drive was a delightful one in the bright
winter sunshine, through a fertile undulating country, until, turning
off from the well-kept military road, we found ourselves in a small
village lying in a deep dark ravine.

Here the costumes were very quaint and interesting, the men in long
blouses of white blanket-like woollen stuff trimmed with black, raw-hide
shoes, and their legs bound with leather thongs; while the women and
girls wore gay colours, short lace-edged petticoats, and quantities of
gold sequins and coins about their necks. Some of those strings of coins
were worth at least from fifteen to twenty pounds.

Our journey of investigation was distinctly humorous. Sometimes the four
of us could not agree as to the personal beauty of a fair candidate for
the approbation of the British public, while those we spoke to were
mostly shy to answer our questions. Many of the village girls flatly
refused to leave their homes unless their lovers were also employed in
the Exhibition, but after much explanation, a good deal of chaff, and
considerable giggling, the names of several were taken in order that
inquiries should be made of the village Mayor before the presentation
and signature of their agreement, which provided for their fare to
London, the payment of their wages, their insurance for the benefit of
their family in case of accident, and their safe return to Bulgaria at
the termination of the Exhibition.

We engaged one flute-player—a tall, dark-faced young giant in
sheepskins—after he had displayed his aptness with his instrument. The
local _han_, wherein we rested, drank _rakhi_, and ate cream-cheese, was
a big common room with earthen floor. In the centre was a large stove,
upon which was cooking some steaming dish with appetising odour. Around
us sat dozens of huge burly fellows, bulky in their sheepskins,
gossiping and drinking wine, a fierce-looking assembly, to be sure, and
yet withal extremely good-humoured.

After a while, the village musician was discovered, a short little
fellow who played a quaint kind of two-stringed violin, and almost as
soon as he sounded the weird, plaintive music, young girls with flowers
entwined in their long plaited tresses, and others, slightly older, with
the white handkerchiefs on their heads—the badge of matrimony—came
trooping forth to perform for us the national dance—the _horo_.

Forming in a line, the youths and maidens crossed arms, linked their
hands in each other’s belts, and then began a curious kind of dance,
keeping step with the music and ever advancing and retreating, keeping
it up for a full half-hour. Now and then the tune was changed, and with
the tune the dance.

In the clear Eastern afterglow of evening, with the thin crescent moon
slowly rising, it was a quaint and curious scene. The weird music, the
strange costumes, the cries of the dancers, and the merry laughter of
the girls, will long live within my memory as a picture worthy the brush
of a great painter.

And as we drove back to Sofia through the silent, starlit night, I
wondered what impression those simple-minded folk, so far removed from
Western civilisation, would receive of our fairy-lamps, pasteboard,
tinsel, imitation mountains, brass bands, and water-chute at Earl’s
Court!

What would be the stories of their adventures in West Kensington and the
wonders of London when they returned to remote Vladaja?

I had, like every other Englishman, always regarded Bulgaria as a _terra
incognita_, where local manufactures were absent and where most goods
were imported. Therefore a surprise awaited me one day when Monsieur M.
V. Lascoff, Director of the Bulgarian Commercial and Industrial Museum
at Sofia, took me round that institution, and showed me specimens of the
various goods produced in the country. In the museum was a most
wonderful collection of articles representing the manufactures of
Bulgaria, ranging from violins to soap, and from table-covers
manufactured from beautifully embroidered jacket sleeves to writing-ink
and tinned fruits.

One of the prominent industries is the distillation of otto-of-roses in
the Shipka district, where in summer the whole country is covered with
blossom, an industry to which I will devote a chapter. Carpets, very
similar to the dark crimson-and-blue Persian varieties, and goat-hair
floor-coverings are made largely by the peasantry, who also weave by
hand wonderfully fine gauzes, tissues, and dress-stuffs. Felt hats,
blankets, pottery, and copies of antique filigree jewellery are also of
peasant manufacture, and are really wonderfully done. The stranger has
no idea, until shown this museum, of the rapid progress the country is
making commercially.

While passing round the museum I chanced to admire two pairs of very
fine antique silver earrings of rare design worn by the Bulgarian
peasants two centuries ago, whereupon the case was at once opened, and
they were presented to me as a little souvenir of my visit.

Sofia, being a brand-new city, is not, of course, quite perfect. It
requires, among other things, a good system of drainage and the
repavement of its streets. The latter work is to be commenced in a few
months’ time. A good first-class hotel, too, is also badly required. At
present the hotels, though clean, are poor and comfortless, and neither
they nor the restaurants do credit to the go-ahead character of the
progressive Bulgarians. All this, however, will soon be remedied, for I
heard of schemes for new hotels with fine restaurants and
winter-gardens. So in six months’ time the traveller may expect to be in
the full enjoyment of them, for in Sofia they do not talk, but act.

If you are anywhere in the Balkans and mention Sofia, you will be told,
with a sigh of regret, “Ah! they have a club there. We haven’t.” I had
heard this in Belgrade, in Sarayevo, in Ragusa, in Cettinje—in fact,
everywhere throughout the Balkans; therefore, with some curiosity I
entered the sacred portals of the much-talked-of club with my friend
Colonel Hubert du Cane, the British military attaché, and was elected a
member during my stay in the Bulgarian capital.

It certainly is a most excellent and comfortable club—one of the best I
know of on the whole of the Continent. The rooms are cosy and artistic,
and the members are most diplomats, Cabinet Ministers, and high
functionaries of the State. At lunch, representatives of most of the
European Powers assemble at the long table and chat merrily, while at
dinner, at the small table at the end, M. Petkoff,[1] the Premier; Dr.
Dimitri Stancioff, the Foreign Minister; and several other members of
the Cabinet, dine nightly at “the Ministers’ table.”

-----

Footnote 1:

  M. Petkoff has, since the present work has been in the press, been
  assassinated while walking in the Boris Garden in Sofia.

-----

The food is excellent, though there are, of course, some grumblers, and
the whole institution is conducted on similar lines to a first-class
London club. Perhaps the custom of personally introducing the stranger
to every single member of the club strikes the foreigner as a little
unnecessary, yet without doubt there is real good-fellowship existing,
such as is entirely absent in some other clubs I know—the English Club
in Brussels and the Florence Club in Florence, in particular.

Men, and especially the diplomats, find it a very great boon, for to go
to Sofia is to find a real good club and quite a host of good
cosmopolitan friends ever ready to show the stranger all kinds of
hospitality.

Social life is far from dull. Sport and games of every kind are most
popular. There is an excellent tennis club, hockey is played three or
four times a week, and large riding parties, personally conducted by
Baron Rubin de Cervin, the Italian military attaché, go out for long
jaunts into the neighbouring mountains several times each week. Then at
night there are constant dinners and receptions at the Legations, and
everyone seems to lead a very pleasant life, without a moment’s dulness.

[Illustration:

  HIS EXCELLENCY D. PETKOFF,
  Prime Minister of Bulgaria.
]

Lady Buchanan, wife of Sir George Buchanan, the British Minister, is the
principal hostess, and with her daughter is foremost in Sofia society.
Until ill-health prevented her recently, she was an ardent player of
hockey and tennis, and constantly in the saddle. Her entertainments are
always brilliant, and in her pretty salon one meets everyone who is
anyone in Sofia.

Again, the Military Club is another centre of social life. The building
is a handsome one, with an extremely fine ballroom, where dances, given
every week through the season, are attended by the elite of Sofia. I
went to one, and found it a particularly gay and brilliant function.

Government institutions in Sofia amazed me. They would do credit to any
European capital. The Agricultural Bank, the inner working of which I
was permitted by Monsieur N. Ghenadieff, Minister of Commerce, to
inspect, is a fine new building of huge dimensions, with a beautifully
ornamented board-room, and its operations no doubt tend much towards
securing the public prosperity of Bulgaria. M. Seraphimoff, the
Governor, who conducted me round, told me that the bank had its origin
in the time of the Turkish rule. As far back as 1863, the Governor of
the _vilayet_ of the Danube created small banks in order to aid the
peasants, the villagers repaying their loans in crops and the banks
selling the produce.

During the Russo-Turkish War, however, many of these banks lost their
capital, for the Turkish functionaries escaped with all the funds they
could place their hands upon. The Provisional Russian Government
re-established the banks, and they have continued to progress until the
present institution was founded. It now has eighty-five branch offices
in the principal towns and agents in most of the villages. Its direction
is under a governor and four directors nominated by Prince Ferdinand.
The operations of the institution are as follows: to accept deposits; to
grant loans on mortgages or securities; to grant loans upon cattle and
agricultural produce; to advance money to the peasants for the purchase
of cattle, seeds, or agricultural implements; to make personal loans; to
open current accounts with peasants; to buy agricultural implements,
seeds, and machinery for the peasants; to accept loans for departments
or communes; and for the transfer of securities. The interest charged or
given is 5 per cent. for deposits for five years, 4 per cent. for three
years, and 3 per cent. for one year. In 1901 the amount of the bank’s
operations was 535,575,182 francs, while in 1905 it amounted to
1,180,778,378 francs, thus showing how greatly it is appreciated by the
peasant, and of what enormous benefit it is to the country.

While there, I saw many uncouth peasants in their sheepskins from
far-distant villages come and obtain loans, repay their interest, or
make petition for their inability to pay. It is very apparent that all
of them greatly appreciate the fact that the Government is their
creditor and not the Jews.

Another institution which I inspected was the State printing press, a
fine building containing the latest machinery; and afterwards I was
shown the building of the magnificent new church of St. Alexander
Newsky, which, being constructed in blocks of white stone just behind
the old church of St. Sophia, is costing over three million francs, and
is to be in memory of the Russian liberator of Bulgaria.

Truly, everywhere one turns in Sofia one sees some new buildings, for
signs of rapid progress and up-to-dateness are on every hand.

Bulgaria, with Servia, is surely destined to expand in the near future,
and the “big Bulgaria” must some day ere long be an accomplished fact.

[Illustration: The Royal Palace: Sofia.]

[Illustration: The Main Boulevard: Sofia.]




                               CHAPTER II
                    BULGARIA AS A FIELD FOR BRITISH
                               ENTERPRISE

Audiences of members of the Bulgarian Cabinet—Dr. Dimitri Stancioff,
    Minister for Foreign Affairs, the coming man of Bulgaria—His
    policy—Facts about the mineral wealth and mining laws—Advice to
    traders and capitalists by the British Vice-Consul in Sofia—Our
    methods as compared with those of other nations.


One of the objects of my observations being to point out where British
capital can, with advantage and security, be employed in the Balkans, I
made, while in Sofia, very careful and exhaustive inquiry.

Information was given me by the late Premier, M. D. Petkoff; the new
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Dimitri Stancioff; and by M.
Ghenadieff, the Minister of Commerce, who was also interesting himself
very actively in the Balkan Exhibition at Earl’s Court. To these three
members of the Bulgarian Cabinet, and to His Royal Highness Prince
Ferdinand himself, I have to acknowledge my thanks for placing all
information at my disposal. The Minister for Foreign Affairs deputed his
cousin, Monsieur D. M. Stancioff, of the Commercial Department of the
Ministry, to accompany me everywhere and explain everything. I was given
a perfectly free hand to go when and where I liked, and, as His
Excellency put it, “to see Bulgaria just as I pleased.”

The Bulgarians are nothing if not thoroughly businesslike. I was
particularly requested by the Ministers not to paint the country in
_couleur de rose_. One member of the Cabinet said, as I stood in the
corner of the ballroom of the Military Club one night, “We would like
the English to know exactly what they can find in Bulgaria, and how we
shall treat them. Don’t flatter us, and cause English capitalists to
expect too much. We have good paying investments for them—if they will
only come here.”

I took a good deal of trouble in going very minutely into this very
important question, and found the Government ready and eager to give
every facility to British capitalists to exploit the great mineral
wealth in their country. The mining laws are just, and extremely
favourable to secure absolute rights to those who invest. The Government
have established in Sofia a Mining Department under the Ministry of
Commerce, where specimens of ore may be seen, and where every
information can be obtained. By the courtesy of M. T. Michailowsky, the
able Director of this Department, I was afforded an opportunity of
inspecting the various collections, and was given much information of
intense interest.

It seems that up to the present time the Government have given
thirty-one concessions, mostly to French, Russian, Belgian, and Italian
capitalists. Of these, sixteen are for coal, four for copper, two for
manganese, two for iron, two for lead, two for zinc, and one for
oil-bearing minerals. There are no English companies in Bulgaria at
present, but I was informed by the Minister of Commerce that the
greatest attention would be paid to any serious application from
England. There are known to exist in the district of Bourgas, on the
Black Sea, very rich copper deposits, also in the Vraza district, and in
Belogradjik, near the Danube.

Two kinds of “permits for research” are granted by the Government. The
first—a general one to search in any part of Bulgaria—is given free, but
with a personal guarantee that any damage done will be made good. The
second is a permit for a special place, which must not be of greater
extent than 8,000,000 square metres, and for this is charged eighty
francs. This lasts for two years. After this time, if a concession is
desired, the Department make inquiries in order to see if the proposed
mine bears sufficient to justify its working. This having been
decided—which takes about a month, or at most two—the Prince issues a
decree, and the concession is granted for ever. No deposit is required,
but the Government takes, for each hectare, three francs per annum for
coals, and four francs per annum for minerals. They also tax the output
at the rate of one per cent. Machinery and material enter the country
free of duty, and as far as I was able to judge, the Bulgarians make
excellent workmen, being very sober, industrious, and obedient. At
present, however, there is large emigration, for there is not sufficient
work for the four and a half millions of people in the country.

[Illustration: HIS EXCELLENCY N. GHENADIEFF, Bulgarian Minister of
Commerce.]

One colliery is worked by the Government at Pernik, and this supplies
the railways, the city of Sofia, and the many industrial enterprises
with about 200,000 tons of excellent coal yearly. All the other mines
are just starting to work, and show prospects of splendid profits.

The copper mine at Vraza, which is exploited by Monsieur Maurocordato of
Constantinople—who has invested about 600,000 francs—has, in two years,
repaid itself, thus showing that there are mines in Bulgaria, and very
rich ones indeed.

All the concessions already granted show great futures, but
unfortunately, with the exception of the Vraza enterprise, the
concessionaires lack capital.

The Bulgarian Mining Law is a very liberal one, being an exception to
the laws of most other countries, for it has been drawn up specially to
induce the investment of foreign capital, as well as to secure the
interests of shareholders. The people of Bulgaria are not rich enough to
exploit their mines themselves, and for that reason the mining industry
of the country must of necessity be in the hands of the foreigner.

When making my inquiries, M. R. S. Kossef, Director of the Commercial
Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was most particular that
I should say nothing that was not absolutely true regarding the mines.
“We do not wish to attract capitalists to Bulgaria by means of
advertisement,” he said. “We wish them to know that they will here find
a good return for their investments, and that if they exploit our mines,
we, on our part, will treat them justly—even generously.”

Besides minerals, Bulgaria is extremely rich in mineral springs—the one
at Banki, seventeen kilometres from Sofia, being about to be exploited
this year, when a very handsome bath establishment and hotel are to be
constructed. The source is situated in the valley beneath the Lubin
mountain, and an automobile service is to be established with Sofia.
This spring gives 1200 litres a minute, and has been pronounced by a
number of first-class authorities in Germany and France to be a water
almost unexcelled in Europe. Other springs abound all over the country,
and so important are they, indeed, that the Government have issued a
large coloured map of them.

In Sofia itself, close to the old mosque, are well-known sulphur baths.
There is a project for building a bath establishment, but to do so it
would mean the pulling down of the mosque in question. The Turks would
not object so much if a new mosque could be built, but it seems that the
difficulties of construction are very great, so for the present the
matter remains in abeyance.

In the whole of Bulgaria over two hundred thermal and mineral springs
are known, and they are situated in eighty different districts. The
department of Sofia alone contains twenty-three, the warmest being at
Dolna-Banja. The more important of the others are at Kniajevo, Gorva,
Banja, and Pantcherevo. Then there are the renowned warm springs at
Verschetz, in the department of Vratza, while in the department of
Plovdiv (Philippopoli) there are more than forty springs, the principal
of them being at Hissar. This, perhaps the most reputed in all the
Orient, is situated in the valley of Tchepino, in the centre of the
Rhodopes Mountains. At Lidji, near Bourgas, and at Sliven, there are
establishments on the latest modern principle. Another which is being
actively exploited is the waters of Meritchteri, in Stara-Zagora, which
are declared by analysts to be quite equal to those of Carlsbad, and
which are believed to have a great future before them. Dr. Ernst Hintz,
of Wiesbaden, has written a book upon these particular waters, and has
given exhaustive analyses.

[Illustration: Early Morning in Sofia.]

[Illustration: On the road to the Shipka.]

There are also minor waters in the town of Kustendil and in dozens of
other villages and towns all over Bulgaria.

Again, to encourage intending pioneers of new branches of industry, it
is interesting to note that the industries in actual existence are
making great progress. The numerous spinning mills and cloth factories
in Eastern Roumelia have been enlarged, while the Varna Cotton Mill,
whose headquarters are in Manchester, employs nearly seven hundred
hands, and in 1905 paid a dividend of 10 per cent.

As regards British trade in Bulgaria, the attention of the English
manufacturer has been repeatedly drawn, in trade reports from the
Consulate in Sofia, to the energetic measures adopted by foreign
competitors to secure the Bulgarian market for themselves. As Germany’s
rivalry is by far the most formidable, it may be well to briefly
illustrate the methods by which that country is steadily absorbing the
trade of the Near East, as explained to me by Mr. Toulmin, British
Vice-Consul in Sofia. Not only do the principal German importers have
capable agents established in the more important towns throughout
Bulgaria to push the sale of their goods, but they also send at regular
intervals experienced travellers who thoroughly investigate the
commercial condition of the country in its various trade centres, take
note of the wants and requirements of the population, and enter into
direct relations with the retail trader. They are, moreover, instructed
to do business at any cost, and are authorised to give credit for a year
or even longer. By their readiness to accept the smallest order, by
scrupulously adhering to conditions and specifications, and by strictly
supplying goods according to sample approved, German importers are now
reaping the fruits of a painstaking and methodical commercial policy,
which menaces even Austria-Hungary’s hitherto unassailed supremacy. The
importance, therefore, of sending out to Bulgaria representatives with
some knowledge of French or German cannot be too strongly impressed on
British manufacturers. It may be well to mention that a gentleman,
representing a well-known Birmingham firm dealing in hardware, called at
the Consulate at Sofia a few months ago, and expressed himself as highly
satisfied with the result of his fortnight’s business tour in Bulgaria.

By the employment of commercial travellers, the translation of their
catalogues, if not into Bulgarian, at any rate into French or German,
the use of the metric system of weights and measures, the conversion of
sterling into francs and centimes, and by giving longer credit—by these
means only can British merchants hope to compete successfully with their
foreign rivals.

[Illustration: The Bulgarian Sobranje.]




                              CHAPTER III
                       WILL BULGARIA DECLARE WAR?

A sitting of the Sobranje—Declarations by the Prime Minister and Dr.
    Stancioff—The new Minister of Foreign Affairs—A sound progressive
    government—Strong army and firm policy—Will the deplorable state of
    Macedonia still be tolerated?—Ominous words.


It was a bitterly cold November evening when, accompanied by Sir George
Buchanan, I entered the Sobranje, or Bulgarian Parliament, to hear the
Ministerial statement upon the future policy of Bulgaria and her
attitude towards Turkey.

A great high-roofed square chamber, enamelled entirely in white and
picked out with gold. At one end a high, red-carpeted daïs with the
throne, behind which hung a full-length portrait of Prince Ferdinand.
Upon an escutcheon above, the Bulgarian lion on a crimson shield. Below
the empty throne, a long red-covered table, where sat the President, a
short, grey-haired little man, who from time to time rang a musical
gong; and in the arena, on a scarlet carpet, rows of horse-shoe benches
half filled by deputies. On the right, at a table placed at an angle,
sat the Ministers. First was Monsieur Petkoff, the Prime Minister, the
most prominent man in Bulgaria, and who has, alas! since shared the fate
of his friend the late Stambouloff; next Dr. Stancioff, the newly
appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs; the Minister of War in a dark
blue uniform with a white cross at his throat; and the Ministers of
Justice, Commerce, and Finance.

Above, around three sides of the huge white-and-gold hall, the galleries
were crowded by the public, while over all big arc lamps shed their
white brilliancy. With us in the diplomats’ gallery sat the Prince’s
confidential secretary, M. Dobrovitch, the German Minister, the
representatives of Turkey and Roumania, Colonel H. du Cane, the British
military attaché, and numbers of other diplomats.

The House was silent. Every ear was strained to catch the Premier’s
words, for it was he who was now speaking. A rather short, grey-bearded
figure, just past the prime, whose left hand as he gesticulated only
showed a stump. He lost it at the Shipka, and as patriot and politician
he was leader of his party—a party of progress, that has been four years
in power with an overwhelming majority.

For the past four hours he had been speaking fluently, easily, without
interruption, forecasting the future policy of Bulgaria—the policy which
is designed to lead the country to prosperity. Bulgaria had long waited
for this, and every word was now being listened to with rapt attention.

On those benches below sat representatives of the people, men of every
class—lawyers, shopkeepers, peasants in their white linen or brown
homespun suits, and even Turks. Surely this Sobranje is essentially a
representative gathering.

Now and then came a spontaneous outburst of applause, very marked when
the Prime Minister dwelt upon the cordial relations with Roumania and
their identical aims with regard to Macedonia. Everyone applauded—all
save one little section of benches on the extreme left—a mere handful of
men—the Opposition. So small are they that they really do not seem to
count. Nobody took any notice of them. With their backs to the holy ikon
of burnished gold and highly finished religious pictures, they sat
facing the Ministers, who were, of course, ever confronted by the emblem
of their faith.

[Illustration: GEN. MICHAEL SAVOFF, Bulgarian Minister of War.]

This speech, being in Bulgarian, was kindly translated to me by M.
Dobrovitch, the Prince’s private secretary. He said—

“To-day neither the Macedonian people nor Bulgaria nor Turkey are the
same states which they were fifteen years ago. In consideration of the
solution of the Macedonian question, we have to reckon with several
factors. The most important of them is that we ought to be ready at a
moment’s notice. We have to be strong! Europe acts and reforms in
Macedonia. No Bulgarian Government can foresee what to expect or how the
events will develop themselves. We must try to be one of the arbitrary
factors in the solution of the Macedonian question, and therefore we
must be armed. We have no intention of annexing Macedonia, but we wish
to better the positions of our compatriots. It is in the interest of
Turkey to reform Macedonia and to shake off all exterior influence. When
even Roumania arms herself for a few countrymen, ought we not also to
arm? We are only a small nation, but in order to be safe we ought to
have a strong army. It is said that such an army would be a luxury. That
would be only the case, then, if we could not help ourselves without
assistance. It is our duty to keep an army ready, for it is only in so
doing that we shall be considered of any consequence when the solution
of the Macedonian question arrives. A weak country is of no importance.
Such a country only serves as a toy for others.

“With regard to her culture, agriculture, and her politics, Bulgaria is
to-day in a different condition than heretofore. Though we do not
acknowledge any progress, other countries see that Bulgaria has made in
twenty years a very great progress and that she still is developing in
large strides. We possess in the Balkan Peninsula a very important
point, where many interests join. The most important, however, is to
hope and to rely on our own strength.”

Dealing with the foreign policy of Bulgaria, the Prime Minister said—

“They tell us that Bulgaria has no friends. On the contrary, we possess
the friendship of all States. Our relations with other nations are not
at all the same as we found them in the beginning. No unimportant
_contretemps_ can disturb our relations with Russia. I am in the
position to proclaim that Bulgaria possesses the sympathy of all other
nations. The fact that our commercial contract with Austria-Hungary is
not yet signed does not say that our relations with each other are not
friendly. Even the two parties of that country are not on good terms,
and they cannot decide the contract. M. Todoroff has said that our
relations to Turkey are rather strained. That is not true: it is the
most difficult thing to enter into any contracts with Turkey. In spite
of those difficulties, we have signed some smaller contracts. It is also
said that Servia has been playing with us, in not showing us the tariff
unions of the Skupshtina. Now, Servia is under pressure from
Austria-Hungary, and at the time that this proposition was brought
before the Skupshtina it could not be carried by a majority of two
votes. That was not sufficient for us. Servia began to export her goods
_viâ_ Varna, and up to to-day no fewer than 4000 waggons of corn have
been exported _viâ_ Varna. Is that no success for our railways?

“Our relations with our neighbours are formed on a purely economical
basis. We mean to further our industry! But this economical basis has
nothing to do with the great and pressing Macedonian question. We only
wish to keep up friendly relations with Roumania. We try to keep our
relations with our neighbours in order, and we count upon success. In
which way shall we reach this success? That surely is our own affair! I
have finished. You see that our policy is a policy of peace. However,
remember that peace can only be protected with arms in the hand,
therefore we wish to enlarge our army. In case we have to incur expenses
for our army, we shall ask them from you without embarrassment. You may
call that bravado on our part, but we shall still do our duty; for peace
to-day means an armed peace. Led by a policy of peace, we shall try to
keep up good relations with all the nations, and we shall do everything
possible to render assistance to our brethren in Macedonia. We shall not
court war, for that might cost us our liberty. You think we are ready to
draw our swords, you believe we want to deliver Macedonia through a war?
I tell you that we only want to continue our former policy and walk on
with courage.”

The Prime Minister, with a final wave of his maimed hand, resumed his
seat amid a loud outburst of applause from both deputies and the general
public in the long galleries of the great white-and-gold Chamber. Only
we, in the diplomats’ gallery, were silent—with the Opposition, of
course.

[Illustration:

  His Excellency L. PAYACOFF,
  Bulgarian Minister of Finance.
]

[Illustration:

  SIR GEORGE BUCHANAN,
  British Minister at Sofia.

  _Photo_]            [_Elliott & Fry._
]

The sitting was a historic one in the annals of Bulgaria, and ere the
applause had died away, the President, on the red-carpeted platform,
rang his gong violently, and called upon the newly appointed Minister of
Foreign Affairs to make his declaration upon Bulgaria’s future policy.

Dr. Stancioff, who until recently was Bulgarian diplomatic agent in St.
Petersburg, rose from his seat at the Ministers’ table—a dark,
good-looking, middle-aged man—a trifle nervous perhaps at addressing the
Chamber for the first time in his new position.

A dead silence followed. Bulgaria awaited the statement with breathless
eagerness. They had heard the Premier’s declaration regarding Macedonia.
What would the Foreign Minister say?

The blue-uniformed attendants took up their positions against the dead
white panelling of the Chamber, lending the necessary colour to complete
the picturesqueness of the scene, while the great arc lamps hissed above
as they shed their bright white light over the rows of deputies upon the
horseshoe benches. On the wall, straight before the Ministers’ table,
the burnished gold of the holy ikon shone to remind them of their duty
to the Almighty and to the nation. For a few moments all was silent.

Then Dr. Stancioff, the new man of Bulgaria, cleared his throat, and in
Bulgar made the following clear, deliberate, and concise statement, of
which the following is a translation. It is, as will be seen, a direct
pronunciation of foreign policy—a firm policy, which may very probably
mean war with Turkey at a no distant date. Indeed, war is in the air in
Bulgaria, and over the Macedonian question may come at any moment;
therefore the Minister’s actual words may, with advantage to the future,
be repeated here.

He said—

“Gentlemen, the Minister President has just given an ample exposition of
the policy the Government has followed up to the present moment, and the
course which it has marked out for itself for the future: on this point,
therefore, there is but little left for me to say, as a member of this
Government, and as one who is willing to bear the responsibility of his
acts before this honourable Assembly.

“Under these circumstances, if I speak, it is chiefly that my silence
may not give rise to misinterpretation, and in order to underline the
words my colleague has said.

“Without doubt, you remember, gentlemen, that I have held the post of
Foreign Minister only a few days, and I am under no obligation to enter
into any explanation of the policy followed before my nomination, and on
the debates, interpellations, and the opinions that it has called forth.
Therefore I shall limit myself to saying a few words on the policy that
we are going to follow for the future.

“There are two questions I wish to discuss. Firstly, our relations with
the Great Powers; and secondly, what is to be our policy in regard to
what I must call the question of questions—Macedonia.

“First of all, I am glad to be able to state that our relations with the
Great Powers are of the best.

“This fact is always being confirmed by the notifications which we
receive from abroad.

“By the line of peaceful development which she has traced for herself,
and which she has never ceased to pursue, by the honourable manner in
which she fulfils all her international engagements, and by the clear
comprehension which she has of her position in the Balkans, Bulgaria is
gaining more and more the sympathy and esteem of the Great Powers.

“It would be superfluous to mention in detail our relations with each
separate State. Nevertheless, I wish to point out the happy fact that as
to what concerns our relation with Russia—the Liberating Power—they are
what they ought to be when one considers the ties which bind us to her,
when one considers the ties which unite the two Slav people, and when
one considers all that Bulgaria owes to Russia. Our relations with
Russia are of the best, and it will always be the Government’s endeavour
to render them even more cordial.

“Economic as well as political considerations bind us to
Austria-Hungary. These interests compel us to maintain relations as
cordial as possible with this Great Power.

“Our friendship with Germany, England, France, and Italy is dear to us.
We greatly appreciate the sympathy of which these countries have given
us so many proofs, and it will be our care, guided by the interests of
our country, to consolidate and ameliorate these relations.

“As regards our relations with the neighbouring States, I assert that
those with Roumania are, as they ought to be, the best and the most
cordial. We appreciate at its true value our sincere friendship with
Roumania, and it will be our task to preserve it.

“Our relations with Servia are good. We desire to cultivate a
neighbourly policy with this State. It is a policy suited to two sister
nations, and we shall cultivate it in accordance with the point of view
that Bulgaria has cultivated for so long. I may add that, to gain this
end, we shall do all that is in our power.

“As to our relations with Montenegro, it suffices to say that ancient
sympathies, the reciprocity of which has never been denied, bind us to
this State. Our sympathies perpetuate the nature of these relations with
our valiant sister nation, and assure us that they can only be good and
cordial.

“From a diplomatic point of view, our relations with Greece are good and
normal; the regrettable incidents which took place last summer in
certain portions of our country belong to the Department of the
Interior. They are, so to speak, a family matter; they cannot, and must
not, be allowed to darken relations between the two countries, who in
their common interests will guard against a modification so undesirable.

“There only remains for me to speak of our relations with Turkey.

“I will be brief, though I could speak at great length upon this
subject.

“Our relations can only be good, or sincerely good. At the present
moment they are only ‘good.’ Before they can become ‘sincerely’ good it
is necessary that the two countries should be convinced not only of the
utility of friendly relations, but also that their interests, political
and economic, demand other relations than those that exist at the
moment. As regards ourselves, who take this matter at its true
valuation, it will be our task to do our utmost to prove to Turkey that
we justly estimate these interests, and are prepared to pursue a sincere
policy, provided that, on her side, she gives us pledges of her
reciprocity.

“You will be able to estimate what that policy is by the attitude that
we have taken up regarding the Macedonian question. This is a European
question, but that does not hinder it from being, at the same time, both
a Bulgarian and a Turkish question. First of all, I declare that the
Bulgarian Government is far from having conceived the idea of provoking
or imposing a solution of the Macedonian question by violent means. But
our Government recognises the significance of this vital question for
our country, it justly estimates the violence with which this question
reflects itself upon the inner life of the Principality, and this
renders it necessary to closely observe its development and its
solution.

“The Macedonian question is in the hands of the Great Powers, who have
taken upon themselves the task of introducing into Macedonia reforms
assuring to the population of this country a development at once more
orderly and more free. It is true that in this respect up to the present
an altogether satisfactory result has not yet been achieved, and that
the Bulgarian population of Macedonia and the _vilayet_ of Adrianople
still have to face complications. But the Government hopes that the good
work they have begun will make progress. The Government will take every
measure to keep itself currently informed of the situation in Macedonia,
and will do everything in its power to at all times assist the
interested Governments, and insist with all its energy upon the
amelioration of the condition of the people of this country. The
Government think that the representation they are going to make to the
Great Powers in regard to a prompter and more energetic carrying out of
the essential reforms in Macedonia is not incompatible with having good
and cordial relations with Turkey. On the contrary, they consider that
action of this nature suggests a more normal conception of the
reciprocal interests of the two countries, and that it will induce the
Government of His Majesty the Sultan to adopt a totally different
attitude in regard to the Bulgarian population of Macedonia—an attitude
which will conduce to its peace, and which will be, at the same time, an
important factor in the destinies of the Empire itself.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Military Manœuvres in Bulgaria.]

“We make no mental reservations with regard to Turkey. We do not dream
of conquest or annexation. But the Bulgarian nation cannot look coolly
on while our blood-brothers (those of our own blood) are being subjected
to such ordeals as those they are suffering in Turkey. In the name of
reciprocity, in the name of justice and of humanity, the Bulgarian
nation demands that the right of existence, and that the right of free
development in their nationality, and its religion, be granted to the
Bulgarians of Macedonia. She demands that their right of enjoying the
fruits of their labour be recognised.

“The Government has the strongest convictions on the subject of the
national duty, and will not waver in carrying them out. It is the
fulfilling of this duty which must constitute the foundation of friendly
relations with Turkey, and in this matter the Government will stand
firm.

“The arming of our military forces must, of necessity, be a
contradiction. We live in the era of armed peace, and we must not lose
sight of the fact that the peace of Europe is due, if not entirely, at
any rate in great part, to the formidable armament that each country
keeps up. Bulgaria, though small, cannot evade this essential, if she
wishes to live in peace.”

Dr. Stancioff resumed his seat amid thunders of applause.

Parliament shortly afterwards adjourned, and we went home to snatch a
hasty dinner and put on our war-paint for the smart ball at the Military
Club.

Will Bulgaria declare war against Turkey? That was that night, and still
is, the question on everyone’s lips in Sofia.




                               CHAPTER IV
                 THE BULGARIAN EXARCHATE AND THE PORTE

A difficult and little-understood problem—Bulgaria the “dark horse” of
    the Peninsula—An explanation of the question between Bulgaria and
    Turkey—The Bulgarian Church and the Imperial Firman—The present
    position of the Exarchate—Europe should listen to the Bulgarian
    demand—Chats with Macedonian orphans—Their terrible stories.


The question of the Bulgarian Exarchate and the Porte is of paramount
importance in Bulgaria at the present moment—a very difficult problem
which the Government have to face.

So little is it understood in England, even by those professing to be
_au courant_ with the Balkan question, that I may perhaps be pardoned if
I endeavour to render the situation intelligible. “What does Bulgaria
want?” is the question so very often asked. What she really wants, and
what are her aims, will, I hope, be shown in the following pages.

Bulgaria, it must always be remembered, is with Servia, the coming
mistress of the Balkans. She is the “dark horse” of the Peninsula. Her
power is admitted, but the extent of her force cannot be gauged. One
thing is certain, that the present Government being an essentially
strong one, and Dr. Stancioff, the Foreign Minister, a man of action,
Bulgaria will no longer sit still and allow her people in Macedonia to
be decimated as they now are daily.

In view of this, therefore, it will perhaps be of interest to explain
impartially at some little length the question which it is feared must,
ere long, bring Turkey and Bulgaria face to face.

Ever since the liberation of Bulgaria up to the present moment the
Bulgarian Exarchate has led a perturbed existence.

As long ago as the Russo-Turkish War it had to undergo serious trials,
the Exarch being obliged to recall the Bulgarian bishops from the
Macedonian diocese. When, after the Treaty of Berlin, he attempted to
restore them to their former sees and to complete the organisation of
the Bulgarian Church—in accordance with the Imperial Firman of May 16,
1870—by establishing a Synod and a Mixed Council, the Exarch received in
1883 from the Turkish Minister of Justice the following significant
answer:—

“When we determine to grant you a status in the _vilayets_, then only we
shall consider the matter of your administration.”

So that, after an existence of only three years, the Bulgarian Exarchate
found its right of having a status in the _vilayets_ put in question.
This, however, did not discourage the Exarch. On the contrary, he
redoubled his efforts. Relying upon the Imperial Firman, and assisted by
the Bulgarian Government, he succeeded in winning for the Exarchate an
official status in Macedonia, insisting at the same time on the
formation of a Synod and a Mixed Council, attached to the Exarchate.

At the present day the authority of the Exarchate in Macedonia extends
over seven dioceses, namely, Uskub, Ochrida, Debr, Monastir, Veless,
Nevrokop, and Stroumitza. In addition to these, there are still ten
bishoprics which, contrary to the Firman, remain vacant, because the
Sultan refuses to grant the indispensable _berats_. During the period
referred to, the Exarchate was also deprived of its right of
representation at Sketcha and Malgara (_vilayet_ of Adrianople), whose
religious communities were suspended in 1897 by the Grand Vizier Rifaat
Pasha. The Bulgarian chapel at Sketcha remains to this day under seals
placed by the Imperial authorities, and consequently inaccessible to the
spiritual needs of the Bulgarian population in that place.

The question of the Mixed Council and the Synod still remains open. The
solution of this question is of supreme moment to the Exarchate and to
the Bulgarian Government. This is due to the position and importance of
the religious communities in the Turkish Empire.

For the better understanding of the bearing of the issues involved, it
will be perhaps necessary to refer to the history of the Turkish Empire
and its attitude towards Bulgaria.

As is well known, instead of trying to assimilate the Christian nations
which they had conquered, the Turks always considered themselves masters
of those whom they had vanquished. Their system of government in this
respect is, of course, in perfect agreement with the spirit of their
religion. The Koran subdivides all countries into two distinct groups:
first those belonging to Islam, and secondly those under the domination
of the giaours (infidels), with whom Islam was in a state of permanent
war. The true believers, the followers of the Prophet, were declared
rulers of the infidels. These purely theocratic principles of State
organisation form, until this day, the basis of the Ottoman Empire.

As exponents of these principles, the Osmanlis did not attempt, after
the conquest of Byzantium, to impose on their new subjects the Turkish
State institutions or civil laws. Although despised and humiliated, the
_rayas_ continued to enjoy privileges which, in many respects, remind
one of those subsequently granted by the capitulations to the foreign
Christians. The place of the rulers of the conquered nations was now
occupied by the representatives of their Church. As an instance,
Mohammed II., conqueror of Constantinople, conferred upon the Patriarch
of Constantinople the title of Miletbashi (Chief of the Nation), and
entrusted to him the administration of the secular and spiritual
interests of his flock. These same prerogatives were also granted to the
Bulgarian Patriarchs of Tirnovo and Ochrida, as representatives of the
Bulgarian nation. The spiritual leaders of the conquered races
delegated, in their turn, part of their attributes to their
inferiors—bishops and priests.

[Illustration: Peasants at Vladaja: Bulgaria.]

[Illustration: Bulgarian Military Types.]

In this way, the clergy formed a body of functionaries invested with
large administrative and judicial powers. Every religious community was
entrusted with the repartition of the State taxes among the members of
the community, and was responsible for their payment into the State
Exchequer. In a word, the spiritual head of a Christian race was at the
same time its civil representative before the Turkish authorities. As
regards the Bulgarian nation, this mission was confided, down to the
year 1770, to its Patriarchs—at first, to the Patriarchs of Tirnovo and
Ochrida, and, later on, to that of the latter place—until the abolition
of the Patriarchate of Ochrida, which was brought about by the intrigues
of the Greeks.

The fact remains that during several centuries the Christians in the
Turkish Empire—and among them the Bulgarians—have, owing to this
peculiarity of the Turkish State policy, enjoyed a relative
independence, and in this way have been able to preserve their
nationality, language, and customs. These exceptional historical
circumstances explain at the same time why, among these Christians, the
sentiment of patriotism has been transformed into an attachment to their
religious communities and their national Church.

This sentiment of patriotism and spiritual consciousness, which, owing
to the oppression exercised by the Greek clergy, after the year 1770 had
weakened to the extent of national self-forgetfulness and identification
with the Greeks, awakened once more among the Bulgarians during the
second half of last century. It acquired great force in the course of
the struggle for the restoration of the ancient national Church. This
new struggle began at the time of the Tanzimat, a period when the Porte
had to fight against the growing omnipotence of the Patriarchate, which
was threatening the very foundations of the State. It had, as its legal
support, the Hatti-Houmayoun of 1856, which reverted to the historical
rights of all religious communities. The second part of Section II. of
this Act runs as follows:—

“Chaque communauté Chrétienne ou d’autre rite non-musulman sera tenue,
dans un délai fixé et avec le concours d’une commission formée _ad hoc_
dans son sein, de procéder, avec ma haute approbation et sous la
surveillance de ma Sublime Porte, à l’examen de ses immunités et
privilèges et d’y discuter et soumettre à ma Sublime Porte les réformes
exigées par le progrès des lumières et du temps.”

Progress, as well as the State interests of the Empire at that time,
required the administrative separation of the Bulgarian Church from the
Patriarchate, and its endowment with a special chief and clergy. It is
interesting to note that, in this struggle of the Sublime Porte with the
Patriarchate for the denationalisation of the Christian
communities—which had for its consequence the weakening of the
Patriarchate and the restriction of its privileges—the Bulgarian nation
acted as allies of the Empire, with “the high approval of the Sultan”
and “under the control of the Sublime Porte.” Thanks mainly to this
alliance and to this struggle against the Patriarchate in favour of the
Bulgarian nation, the Patriarchate was considerably weakened through the
Organic Statute of 1862, while the Bulgarian Church was restored in
virtue of the Firman of 1870.

With the Bulgarian Church restored, it was necessary, in accordance with
the Imperial Firman, that it should be organised after the pattern of
the Eastern Orthodox Church, of which it formed a branch, without in any
case departing from its canons. The Exarchate, as its highest
administrative body, was organised on such close lines with the
Patriarchate, that its Organic Statute is, in greater part, nothing but
a reproduction of that of the Patriarchate in 1862, which, in its turn,
is based on the principles laid down by the Hatti-Houmayoun.

[Illustration: Peasants near Tirnovo, Bulgaria.]

In view of all this, it must be admitted that to-day the struggle—or
rather the insistence of the Exarchate for the speedier organisation of
a Synod and a Mixed Council, forming part of itself—is only a just and
legal claim of the rights and privileges sanctioned by the Firman of
1870. It should be clearly understood that the Bulgarian Exarchate does
not ask for any new privileges; all that it demands is the restoration
of the Synod and the Mixed Council as they existed before the
Russo-Turkish War. Surely this is but a very natural demand! The
question concerns two administrative bodies, with attributes strictly
defined by the canons of the Church, as well as by the statute of the
Exarchate and the Imperial Firman, and which cannot be delegated to
anyone else, but must be exercised by the Synod and the Mixed Council.
To the Synod are reserved all questions of the _forum ecclesiasticum_,
while the mission of the Mixed Council is to look after the schools, the
civil administration, and the organisation of the Bulgarian nationality.
The Mixed Council forms at the same time the highest judicial body in
civil cases between Bulgarians—the mixed courts being reserved for civil
cases between Mohammedans and Christians, as well as for commercial and
criminal cases without any distinction of religion. This brief mention
of the attributes of the Synod and of the Mixed Council is surely
sufficient to show the very urgent need of their speedy restoration and
organisation.

The needs of the Church and of the community have greatly increased;
they are no longer what they used to be thirty years ago, and cannot be
left disregarded. The requirements of the population and of the times
give rise to fresh questions, while on the other hand the Imperial
Ottoman Government comes every day with fresh demands to the Exarchate,
which shares in the administration of the country, as an auxiliary
organ.

In these present-day times of trial the Bulgarian population in
Macedonia, broken up, persecuted, and outlawed as it is, turns for help
and protection to its legal head and protector, the Exarch. The Exarch
is, however, helpless, because personally he has no authority to decide
such questions as fall within the competence of the Mixed Council. His
only rôle in such matters is to act as an intermediary between the
Council and the Sublime Porte.

The present position of the Exarchate is an abnormal one. According to
the Firman, which has the force of law within the Empire, it has
well-defined rights and obligations as regards the Porte and the
Bulgarian nation in the _vilayets_, which, however, it cannot exercise
or fulfil because of its imperfect and irregular organisation. This
state of things provokes among the populations of the Empire complaints
both against the Exarchate and the Imperial authorities. Failing to find
help and protection at the hands of the legal authorities, the outraged
population is naturally tempted to look for such in illegal quarters,
and in its despair places its hopes in foreign intervention. This state
of affairs explains and fully justifies such tendencies among the
Macedonian population. The true interests of the Ottoman Empire demand
the preservation of its Christian inhabitants from similar hopes and
tendencies. The population ought to expect all improvements from
Constantinople. In this respect the formation of a Synod and of a Mixed
Council attached to the Exarchate is not only a just demand, admitted on
every hand outside Turkey, but is highly desirable and indispensable for
the pacification of public opinion both in the _vilayets_ and in
Bulgaria. By their very constitution, this Synod and the Mixed Council
would act as legal interpreters of the needs of the Bulgarian population
in Macedonia and the _vilayet_ of Adrianople, and would form a strong
link between the Bulgarians and the Sublime Porte.

It would surely be preferable both for the Powers and for Turkey if they
had to deal with a legally organised and responsible body, such as the
Bulgarian Exarchate. Indeed, this latter, if completed and fortified by
the creation of the Synod and the Mixed Council, would no doubt succeed
in attracting the attention of the Bulgarian population of the
_vilayets_ once more to Constantinople. The cause of the Macedonian
reforms would benefit considerably from such an organisation, while the
difficult task of the Powers would be greatly facilitated.

The just and legal measure I have outlined above would pacify public
opinion in the Principality of Bulgaria. That something must be done is
very plain. Matters in Macedonia cannot be allowed to remain as they
are—a blot upon the civilisation of Europe. Bulgaria is, as far as I
have been able to judge from personal inquiry, determined to take a
strong and definite line. She cannot remain indifferent to the injustice
of the Porte towards the Bulgarian Exarchate; neither can she overlook
the burning question. Even if she were inclined to adopt such a course,
she would not be in a position to do so. No Bulgarian Government could
follow such a policy without being accused of violating the
Constitution, according to which the Eastern Orthodox religion is the
State religion of the country.

In ecclesiastical matters the Principality is, according to Article 39
of the Bulgarian Constitution, placed under the control of the highest
spiritual authority of the Bulgarian Church, wherever that authority may
be found. This authority is the Bulgarian Exarchate. It must be
remembered, too, that this Constitution was ratified at the time, by the
Powers signatory of the Treaty of Berlin. The right of the Principality
to take an interest in the normal and regular working of the authority
in question now became even more indisputable. Besides, political
considerations of the very highest importance to the peace of Europe
place upon the Bulgarian Government the duty of reminding the Great
Powers, Turkey included, of the liabilities which they assumed towards
the Christian population of the vilayets by virtue of Articles 25 and 62
of the Treaty of Berlin.

Only natural is it, and in the cause of humanity, that Bulgaria should
seek to protect the Bulgarians in Macedonia. Never has the country been
in a worse state than at the present time, and never has European
interference been more needed than at this moment.

Europe should listen attentively to this Bulgarian complaint against
Turkey, for it is surely a just one, crying loudly for remedy. The blood
of the poor massacred thousands in Macedonia calls to-day to the Powers
for mercy and justice, and yet to-morrow, and still to-morrow, a hundred
more defenceless men and women and innocent children are put to the
sword, mutilated and murdered, and we in England hear nothing about it.
Macedonia is, alas! a country where God is high and Justice far away.

This question of the Bulgarian Exarchate and the Porte is, I know, an
abstruse one, neglected by most writers on the subject. However, it is
one of the highest importance—one which is inseparable from the future
policy of Bulgaria.

Things cannot remain long in Macedonia as I myself saw them. Europe
holds up her hands in virtuous horror at the so-called Congo scandals
and seeks out every detail of maladministration, yet she turns a deaf
ear to the piteous cry of the Macedonians, whose homes are daily burned
and pillaged, and whose villages are often completely wiped out—both
dwellings and inhabitants—in the course of a few hours by fiends filled
with the lust of blood.

If you doubt that there are horrible atrocities daily committed in
Macedonia by Greeks and Turks alike, you need go no farther than Sofia.
Visit the Orphanage for Macedonian boys established three years ago by
Mr. Pierce O’Mahony, an Irish philanthropist, of Grange Con, County
Wicklow. This gentleman was living in Sofia, and hearing terrible
stories of massacres across the frontier, established an institution for
the education of orphans whose parents had been killed in the raids.
When I visited the place, I found it neat, orderly, and doing a most
charitable and excellent work under the care of two English nursing
sisters. In a large commodious house on the outskirts of the capital
were thirty lads ranging in age from seven to fifteen, all dressed in
their white woollen and black-braided national costume of Macedonia.

When the boys were assembled in the large classroom, I heard some of
their stories, and truly they were appalling, many of the details too
terrible to be placed here on record. As an instance, one lad I saw, a
bright, intelligent little fellow, was admitted to the Orphanage a few
months ago. He lived in the district of Ochrida, and was one day tending
his sheep as usual, when some Turkish soldiers came past.

“Have you seen a Bulgarian band pass along just now?” they inquired.

The lad declared that he had seen nobody. The soldiers doubted him, for
the Bulgarian band in question was protecting the villages in that
neighbourhood.

[Illustration: Tziganes on the Isker road.]

They asked again, and the boy denied having seen anybody, which was the
truth. Whereupon one of the Sultan’s soldiers smashed the little
fellow’s skull in with the butt end of his rifle, while another took a
knife and cut his throat from ear to ear. They then dug a rough hole in
the ground and buried him. Some hours after, a shepherd passing noticed
that his dog was scratching the earth, and on going to the spot, heard
moans. The lad was quickly exhumed, and found to be still living. For
many weeks he was in the hospital in Salonica, but was eventually
admitted to Mr. O’Mahony’s Home. When I saw him, the wound in the head
had only just healed, and the ugly scar across the throat was still red.
I have his photograph, but it is too ghastly to here reproduce.

Another little lad described to me how his father and mother had been
tortured by the Turks and afterwards burnt alive before his eyes, while
another related how he had been captured by the Turks, taken into
slavery, and afterwards escaped.

Each orphan boy had his own terrible story to tell, stories that were
full of horror and inhuman butchery, stories that made one wonder
whether such things could really happen in this enlightened century.

As to the institute and its general conduct, there is no doubt it is
performing a most humane and charitable work. There are thousands of the
homeless and fatherless in Macedonia, increasing thousands, and the
institute, which is purely a piece of private philanthropy, cannot
possibly admit one-tenth of the applicants for its charity. The founder
hopes, if private subscribers or donors come forward, to extend his
work, and Lady Buchanan of the British Legation, Sofia, who takes a
great interest in it, told me that she would be very pleased to
acknowledge any subscriptions sent to her.

Certainly it is most deserving of support, for already it has sent
Macedonian lads into the Bulgarian Agricultural School at Kustendil; two
others are in the Cadet School in Sofia, and will become officers;
others have been taught trades and are earning their living; and one has
been sent to England. Though the founder is a member of the Church of
England, the lads are allowed to retain their own religion, the
Orthodox.

Every right-minded man must, after investigating the complaint of
Bulgaria against the Porte regarding the Exarchate, take the part of
Bulgaria. Macedonia is to-day and every day being decimated by Greek
bands who raid under the protection and with the connivance of the
Turks, and assuredly Bulgaria has just cause for reprisals. At present,
however, her bands are inactive, and she is endeavouring to adjust the
difficulty by diplomatic channels. Bulgaria has no desire for war,
neither has Turkey.

But the question must ere long be faced boldly and fearlessly, and a
solution arrived at. Bulgaria has right on her side, and in the name of
humanity it is the duty of the Powers to support her.

[Illustration: Where I spent a comfortless night in Bulgaria.]

[Illustration: Bulgarian Laundresses.]




                               CHAPTER V
                          AT A ROSE DISTILLERY

Tobacco growing in Bulgaria—The otto-of-rose industry—About
    adulteration—Difficulties of obtaining the pure extract—Corrupting
    the peasant—What Monsieur Shipkoff told me—Some tests to discover
    adulteration—Interesting facts about roses.

NO description of the present condition of Bulgaria would be complete
without mention of the two principal industrial plants cultivated in the
country—tobacco and roses.

Tobacco, I noticed, was particularly plentiful in the south and in the
departments of Silistra and Kustendil. The department of Haskovo, it
appears, produces 800,000 kilos of first quality tobacco, followed by
Philippopoli with 300,000 kilos, Kustendil with 270,000 kilos, and
Silistra with 210,000. Three-quarters of all this tobacco is consumed in
the country, for Bulgarians are inveterate cigarette-smokers, and the
remaining quarter exported. Tobacco in leaf is sold at an average price
of 80 centimes to 1 fr. 50 c. per kilogramme. The Government give the
peasants, in order to encourage tobacco cultivation, quantities of seed
gratis.

As regards the cultivation of roses, the special species grown are the
red rose (_Rosa damascena_) and various species of white rose, of which
the _Rosa moscata_ is the most used, the best and most extensive
plantations being at Kazanlik, Karlovo, Klissoura, and Stara-Sagora.

I was afforded an opportunity of visiting one of the otto-of-rose
distilleries, and the sweet, penetrating perfume of it clings still to
the nostrils. Bulgarian otto-of-rose is famous the world over, and its
production is carried on in 175 communes in the departments of
Philippopoli and Stara-Sagora.

The chief manufacturers and exporters of otto-of-rose are Messrs.
Shipkoff & Co. of Kazanlik, who export about two-thirds of the whole
rose produce. This firm, as well as the others, make advances to the
peasantry upon their growing crops of roses, and the peasant pays these
advances in otto-of-rose already distilled. The firms make it a part of
the contract that the extract must be pure, and can refuse to accept it
if adulterated. As a check, all the exporters make it a point to
themselves distil in the various rose-growing districts for the purpose
of obtaining the proper standard of purity.

I had an opportunity of visiting Mr. Theodore Shipkoff, Deputy for
Kazanlik, of the great firm of Shipkoff & Co. He showed me over the
factory, and gave me a number of extremely interesting details regarding
this unique industry.

It appears that nowadays it is not an easy matter to obtain pure
otto-of-rose. Some forty years ago the entire rose industry was an ideal
one. No farmers, small or big, adulterated their otto. They knew nothing
about adulteration. In their primitive simplicity and honesty, it would
have been altogether against their nature to falsify in any way their
produce. The jobbers and dealers who used to come from Adrianople and
Constantinople to buy it, and who at that time controlled the whole
exportation, while buying it from the growers in its pure state, soon
began to adulterate it with the Turkish geranium oil (_Idris Yaghi_).
They found this way of adulterating the otto-of-rose so profitable that,
in order to use a larger percentage of geranium oil and at the same time
to render it less easily detected, they began to import from
Constantinople the crude geranium oil, and in the presence of the
growers to redistil and refine it in rose-flowers and rose-water, thus
taking away its pungent and heavy vegetable odour. Some of the growers
soon learned to do this themselves, and the peddling traders started
regular factories for the express purpose of refining geranium oil and
selling it afterwards to the peasants for purposes of adulteration. In
this way many villages were gradually corrupted, and the otto-of-rose
they produced was more or less adulterated with geranium oil; but most
of the adulteration has always been done by the exporting jobbers and
dealers. This, of course, brought much discredit to the rose industry,
and the Government, some fifteen years ago, was compelled to prohibit
the importation of geranium oil into the country. This measure was a
most wholesome one, and checked, to some extent, the free and open
importation of geranium, and saved many of the rose villages from
further corruption. However, a great deal of geranium oil is still
imported _sub rosâ_ into Bulgaria by unscrupulous jobbers and exporters,
and much of the otto-of-rose sold is largely adulterated with it.

Mr. Shipkoff, in course of his conversation with me when he showed me
over his distillery at Kazanlik, said, “As our principle is to export
only the genuine otto-of-rose, and sell only what we can guarantee as
absolutely pure, our task has been, and is, a most difficult one. With
the primitive system of distillation still in use in our country, it is
actually impossible for us to distil all the otto-of-rose we export, and
we still have to depend on our growers for the greater part of our
stock. When the means of transportation and communication improve, it
will then be possible to centralise the whole distillation in a few
places, and establish large steam distilleries, such as those in Grasse,
Cannes, and Leipzig. At present most of the rose-flowers are distilled
in the villages where they are grown, and by the growers themselves,
this method being by far the cheapest. Still, to guard ourselves from
all possible adulteration on the part of our suppliers, and at the same
time to be able to get as much otto-of-rose as possible of our own
distillation, we ourselves have to distil in all the principal places in
the eight rose counties of the rose district, and each year we increase
our own distillations.

“It is by virtue of this extensive distillation that we are able to
obtain pure otto. Besides this practical means, we have continually
experimented to discover various tests, whereby we can readily
distinguish the pure from the adulterated rose. It is quite impossible
simply from the sense of smell to always recognise an adulteration from
two to five per cent., and the following are the tests, which we possess
and use in conducting our business: the freezing-point test, the
specific gravity test, the density test, the spectrum test, the iodine
test, and the nitric acid test.

“Otto-of-rose, when analysed, is found to consist of two ingredients:
the oleoptene, which is the liquid and odoriferous part of the
otto-of-rose, and the stereoptene, which is the solid and odourless
part, and causes the crystallisation of the otto-of-rose. The proportion
in which these two ingredients are combined in the pure otto-of-rose is
more or less fixed, varying only from 10 to 15 per cent. according to
the elevation of the localities in which the otto is produced. The
highest proportion—15 per cent.—is found in otto-of-rose distilled in
villages situated highest in the Balkans; while the villages down in the
plains produce otto-of-rose containing only 10 to 11 per cent. of
stereoptene. We have lately made experiments to distil these two
ingredients separately, but they can best be separated from each other
by a very simple physical process. The average proportion of these two
ingredients in our stocks during the last five years has been about 12½
per cent. of stereoptene and 87½ per cent. of oleoptene.

“The oil usually employed for the adulteration of otto-of-rose is the
geranium oil (_Palagonium Radula_) known to the trade as Turkish
geranium oil. This oil is made in India and is sold in Constantinople.
Formerly they used this oil as adulterant in its crude state, but now it
is generally refined in rose-water or rose-flower before it is used. No
matter how well refined, it is impossible to put 5 per cent. of it in
otto-of-rose without changing the freezing point of the otto, its
specific gravity, and the proportion in which the stereoptene and
oleoptene are combined. Geranium oil contains no stereoptene, and in
consequence does not crystallise. In the best refined geranium oil the
specific gravity is fully ·880—a difference in weight of about eighteen
points. All this helps to detect its presence in otto-of-rose. It can
also be detected by means of the iodine as well as the nitric acid
tests. The presence of geranium oil in otto-of-rose lowers its freezing
point, renders its specific gravity heavier, and changes the proportion
in which the oleoptene and stereoptene are combined.

[Illustration: The Rose-fields near Kazanlik.]

“In order to rectify these defects, the use of spermaceti, paraffin, and
alcohol have often been resorted to, but the presence of all these three
substances can be discovered without any difficulty. The crystals of
both spermaceti and paraffin are entirely different from the crystals of
the stereoptene of otto-of-rose, and otto-of-rose containing any
proportion of either will lose, when congealed, its sharp-pointed,
needle-like crystals. Besides, paraffin and spermaceti being fatty oils,
are much heavier, and in time will settle at the bottom. Furthermore,
they are not volatile as stereoptene. The presence of alcohol is
detected either by the use of double distilled water or of pure
glycerine.”

By resorting to these various tests in the selection of supplies from
growers, as well as by extensive distillation in all the principal
localities, respectable firms are always able to procure the finest
otto-of-rose and to export it in its absolute purity.

The whole rose district comprises in all 173 villages, devoted to rose
culture, with about 15,500 acres of rose plantations. These yield
annually from 20,000,000 to 25,000,000 pounds of rose-flowers, for the
distillation of which some 13,000 native stills are used. The total
yield of otto annually varies according to the year—from 90,000 to
150,000 ounces; the average crop being about 120,000 ounces of pure
otto-of-rose. It generally takes from 160 to 250 pounds rose-flowers to
make one ounce of otto—and there are about 300 roses to the pound.

Nearly all the otto produced in Bulgaria is exported for consumption
abroad, and chiefly to New York, Paris, and London, its three largest
markets, and from there it is distributed all over the world. Formerly
the perfumers used to be supplied through the intermediary of
Constantinople, Leipzig, and London, but now all large consumers buy
their supply direct. The house of Shipkoff was the first to inaugurate
this system of direct relations. It saves many extra charges, and in
case of the goods delivered turning out badly, the guilty party is at
once detected.

Shipkoffs do not believe in all sorts of grades, their motto being,
“_Only one quality—the best._”

The culture of roses in Bulgaria is not only the oldest and most
attractive industry of the country, but also quite exclusively its own.
While roses are found all over the world and are grown everywhere in
garden-beds, in Bulgaria they are grown in extensive fields, as we grow
the potato or corn. This industry, however, is confined only to one
special district in Bulgaria, which is comprised in the eight counties
above mentioned, with Kazanlik as their central town, called, in
consequence, the capital of the rose district. The rose district extends
along that portion of the southern slopes of the Balkan mountains,
comprising in itself the branch range of the Little Balkans, which
shoots out of the main Balkans and forms one of its chief arms. The
average length of the rose district is about eighty miles, and its
average width is about thirty miles. Its average elevation is about 1300
feet above the level of the sea. The average height of the Balkans along
the rose district is about 5600 feet, while that of the Little Balkans
is about 3700 feet.

Attempts have often been made to grow roses all over Bulgaria, but they
have all proved a failure. It is true that roses have been grown, and
are grown to this day, in Persia, India, Egypt, and China for this
purpose, but they hardly produce any otto-of-rose. They produce almost
exclusively rose-water, and it is chiefly used for local consumption. In
the Maritime Alps of Southern France, and especially in Cannes and
Grasse, they grow quite extensively the “Provence rose,” and they
extract from it a peculiar otto-of-rose, but the quantity is very
limited, and they chiefly use their flowers to make pomades and
rose-water. In Leipzig they also grow roses, but with very little
success. Almost in all the other places where the roses are grown, they
lack the peculiar advantages of climate that Bulgaria possesses, and
have in consequence to use twice and even thrice the quantity of flowers
to make the same amount of otto. The hottest weather ever experienced in
summer in this part of Bulgaria is 88° Fahr. and the coldest of winter
is rarely under 15° Fahr. above zero. Then, during the harvest and
distillation season, which is in the latter part of May and the first
part of June, there we have regular showers of rain and in the mornings
heavy falls of dew—both absolutely necessary for the otto-of-rose
distillation.

After the Russo-Turkish War in 1877-78, when Bulgaria was separated from
Turkey and constituted into an independent Principality, the Turkish
Government spent thousands of pounds in trying to replant the Kazanlik
rose in Asia Minor, and many scores of rose-gardens were planted around
Broussa, but to no purpose. The gardens grew, thrived, and yielded
plenty of flowers, but when distilled they got only rose-water and very
little otto, so the work, in consequence, could not pay. It is the
peculiarity of the soil, and chiefly that of the atmosphere of this
special district in Bulgaria, caused by the peculiar formation of the
mountain ranges surrounding it, which makes the roses thrive and yield
sufficient otto-of-rose to pay for the very laborious work that the
culture entails.

The red rose grown is a semi-double light red rose like the French _rose
du roi_, having from thirty to thirty-six petals and possessing an
extremely rich and fragrant odour. The growing of the rose is very much
like the growth of the vine, and the planting of a rose-garden is
similar to that of a vineyard. After the ground has been prepared by
tilling and manuring, ditches are made in rows, about a foot and a half
in depth and width, and a yard and a half apart. At the bottom of these
ditches soft earth mixed with manure is spread, on which the roots
forming the bushes of the new rose-garden and taken from old bushes are
firmly stuck vertically, and then well covered up with the earth and
manure. This is generally done in the spring, when the rain showers
abound. The roses thus planted soon take root, and in less than two
months send up soft, glossy green shoots, which in a year become about a
foot high. In the second year they are over two feet high, and yield a
few rose-flowers. The first crop worth gathering is in the third year,
and in the fifth year they attain their full growth. They reach then a
height of about six feet, the bushes forming thick rows of clustered
rose-trees and continuing to yield rich crops of flowers for a period of
twenty years, and in some localities twenty-five years, after the lapse
of which time they become old, begin to die from the winter’s cold and
frost, and yield but few flowers. Then the old rose-bushes are dug out
and the garden is planted anew.

A rose-garden requires constant care. During the year it is hoed three
times. In autumn the roots are covered up with earth to guard them from
the winter’s cold. In spring that earth is thrown off and the bushes are
pruned, and every other year the garden is manured.

The roses yield only one crop every year. The rose-harvest begins in the
latter part of May, and as the weather is dry and hot or cool and rainy
during the blossoming season, it may last from eighteen to thirty days.
During the whole harvest the distillation of the crop is carried on.
Morning after morning, hours before sunrise, groups of young maidens and
boys, all dressed in their beautiful bright-coloured native costumes,
proceed with songs to the rose-gardens to gather the newly opened buds
while the heavy morning dew is still on the blossoms. Nothing can
present a more captivating scene than a rose-garden in bloom, with its
gaily attired peasant-girls gathering the roses, and its
nightingales—those romantic lovers of the _Regina florum_—trying in most
melodious songs to out-sing the maidens.

As soon as the roses are gathered they are taken to the distillery,
spread in cool and shady rooms, and gradually distilled during the day.
The alembics used for this purpose are of the simplest kind. They
consist of a convex tinned copper boiler, narrowed at the top to a neck
on which is fixed a spherical head-piece with a tube on one side, to
which is attached the condensing tube, sloping down and passing through
the condenser or refrigerator, a large vessel into which cold water is
constantly running. The capacity of the boiler is about 250 pounds of
water. In distilling the roses from twenty to twenty-five pounds of
flowers are put in it, and from five to six times that much of water,
thus nearly filling three-fourths of the boiler.

[Illustration: Gathering Roses at Kazanlik.]

[Illustration: Testing Otto of Rose at Kazanlik.]

This done, the head-piece and condensing tube are tightly attached, the
fire started, and the distilling of its contents begun. This is carried
on about forty-five minutes, until thirty to thirty-five pounds of
rose-water are extracted from each boiler. The boilers are then emptied,
cleansed with clear water, and the same process is repeated until all
the morning-gathered flowers are distilled. The rose-water extracted
from the first distillation is redistilled in the same way, only in this
second distillation from 100 to 120 pounds of rose-water are used, and
out of it they extract some thirty to thirty-five pounds of second
rose-water. This double-distilled rose-water is very strong in odour and
quite turbid in appearance; it is full of tiny yellow-white oily
globules floating in it, and as the bottle is filled they rise up and
gather on the top of the long-necked bottles in which the rose-water
runs. These globules are the otto-of-rose, and when all the oil has
settled on the tops of the bottles, it is skimmed and put in separate
bottles by little conical spoons, with a little hole in the bottom,
large enough to let the water run out but not the oil.

Thus collected, the otto is sent to London, Paris, and New York, where
it is used in the manufacture of high-class perfumes and soaps, etc.




                               CHAPTER VI
                         THE FUTURE OF BULGARIA

Bulgaria’s future greatness—Her firm policy in Macedonia—An audience of
    Dr. Stancioff, Minister of Foreign Affairs—A chat with the Prime
    Minister—Turkey the enemy of Bulgaria—Balkan “news” in the London
    papers—How it is manufactured—Turkish dominion doomed.


The future of Bulgaria is assured.

Bulgaria, with Servia, is destined to become the power in the Balkans.
Vigorous, strong, and fearless, under a Prince who has the courage of
his own convictions, the country is one of progress, of great military
strength and continual expansion. The Bulgar differs from the Roumanian
inasmuch as he is more patriotic and far less extravagant; he is frugal,
progressive, and active. His capital is not the weak imitation of Paris,
as is Bucharest, nor are his officers gorgeously dressed and corseted.
On the contrary, they are hardy, well trained, well equipped, and
business-like to a degree.

Some interesting sidelights upon Bulgaria’s growing military strength
have been revealed at the recent manœuvres, while an afternoon walk
through Sofia will show how rapidly and firmly is the capital being
established—the capital which is destined some day to be the capital of
the Balkans.

[Illustration: Bulgarian Peasants dancing the “horo.”]

On every hand I saw evidence of Bulgaria’s future greatness. The
Ministry, without exception, is a strong one and incorruptible. There is
a firmness and stability about everything, all betokening a great
future. Ministerial crises are few, and the people do not neglect their
affairs for politics, as is the case in some Balkan countries. Under
Prince Ferdinand Bulgaria has progressed amazingly, and in the near
future will assume a position of supreme importance in the Peninsula.
Her policy towards Roumania is, however, a somewhat undecided one. While
the Roumanians fondly think that Bulgaria cannot take decisive action in
Macedonia without her consent, Bulgaria seems to calmly ignore
Roumania’s existence. I have reason for believing that some satisfactory
agreement will be arrived at in the course of the next month or two.
Bulgaria, however, is wide awake and well aware that Roumania is
desirous of a slice of her territory from the Danube down to the Black
Sea. Only to obtain this would Roumania be party to any alliance
regarding Macedonia.

One morning at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Sofia I had audience
with the newly appointed Minister, His Excellency Dr. Dimitri Stancioff.
He is the coming man of Bulgaria, at one time private secretary to the
Prince, and afterwards, as already explained, diplomatic agent in St.
Petersburg, where he had an extremely brilliant career.

Of middle height, slim of figure, with dark hair slightly silvered, a
keen, rather aquiline face, and sharp eyes, he is a man full of eager
activity, quick perception, and indomitable energy.

He had only been in office a few days, and was overwhelmed with work,
yet he spared me half an hour for a chat, although certain chiefs of the
foreign missions were waiting for audience. In his quiet, sombre,
business-like cabinet, he sat behind his littered table, smiling affably
and ready to answer any questions I put to him.

“You want to see Bulgaria? Very well, I will give orders that you have
good guides, and that you are supplied with all the official information
available. Only,” he laughed, “please do not flatter us. We prefer
honest criticism.”

He took down a list of the heads of the information I wanted, gave me a
cigarette, and then we discussed the future of Bulgaria.

“His Royal Highness the Prince has told me that he sent you an
autographed portrait last night. Have you received it?”

I replied in the affirmative.

“He will see you in Varna,” he went on. “His Highness particularly
wishes to see you.”

Then I asked him to explain Bulgaria’s future policy in the Balkans.

“You heard my speech in the Sobranje. Well, that constitutes in brief
the future policy of Bulgaria—peace. We are a young nation, and we do
not desire any complications with our neighbours. You have seen Sofia.
You have seen how in the past ten years it has risen. Yet there still
remains very much to do. The city is in a state of construction, and so
it is all through the country. All we desire is to be allowed peace, in
order to develop our resources.”

“And your relations with Turkey?” I asked.

“Ah! those constant incidents in Macedonia are of course regrettable.
The question is always with us. Yet since I assumed office I have
received reports from our diplomatic agent in Constantinople which
clearly show that Turkey has assumed a much more conciliatory attitude.
We are hoping for the best. Our relations with Turkey are still
friendly, and the friendship is becoming daily more firmly cemented.
What we wish, however, to see is greater interest taken by the Powers in
the Macedonian question. Neither Bulgaria nor Servia nor Roumania can
solve the great problem—only joint action by the Powers. We hope that,
ere long, an international council may be held to discuss and decide the
question once and for all. The present state of affairs is intolerable.
But you will see for yourself when you get into Macedonia.”

And assuredly, two months later, I did see—things that are incredible in
Europe in this twentieth century.

[Illustration: Summit of the Shipka Pass.]

[Illustration: Defile of the Isker.]

I also had a pleasant chat with Monsieur D. Petkoff, the Prime Minister.
We sat next each other at dinner one night at Sir George Buchanan’s, and
I learnt that he had been responsible for the destruction of old Sofia,
and the laying out of the new city. For six years of the reconstruction
he had been Mayor of the capital, and, as I afterwards learnt, to his
efforts the great progress had been due. Sofia may well be called
Petkoffopolis. At any rate, it is hoped that one of the streets will be
named after him. He struck me as an earnest, thoughtful man, the born
leader of a party. Rather short of stature, dark-haired, with a small
imperial just turning grey, his countenance was strong, open, and very
pleasant. He spoke deliberately, with an air of conviction, and his
conversation with me, which was of a private nature, was that of a man
who believed in the future of his country and was an advocate of peace
and progress.

As Austria is Servia’s sworn enemy, so is Turkey the enemy of Bulgaria.
War would have been declared by Turkey against Bulgaria long ago, were
it not for the personal veto of the Sultan, who is not only contrary to
hostilities with his near neighbour, but views Bulgaria with increasing
favour. His Majesty has, if the real truth be told, accurately gauged
his neighbour’s military strength. The war party in Turkey have long
been eager for an attack upon Bulgaria, but the Sultan is a far-seeing
monarch, and no one knows better than he that Bulgaria is very strong in
a military sense, and is a power to be reckoned with if ever the
Macedonian question is solved by force of arms.

At present it is the Greeks who, by their unwarrantable attacks upon the
Macedonian villages, are attempting to incite and provoke Bulgaria. Here
is an instance. Not long ago the Bulgarian police received secret
information, and searched the house of the Greek Bishop of
Philippopolis, where they found many incriminating documents showing
plainly that the Greek Church was actually collecting funds for armed
raids upon the Bulgarians in Macedonia. Letters were found addressed to
the various Greek priests giving the orders as to how they should act.
These somehow got into the papers, whereupon a serious riot occurred in
Philippopolis, and the Bulgarian soldiery were sent to quell it.
Bulgaria’s enemies, mostly subsidised Press correspondents, declared
that the riot against the Greeks was provoked by the Government itself,
and such statements were published broadcast in the Press of Europe.
These allegations, however, had absolutely no foundation, for the rising
was purely a local one, prompted by the knowledge that the Bishop was
fostering a conspiracy against their brothers in Macedonia. If ever the
Bulgarian public was provoked to reprisals, it was on that historic day,
and the Government’s action was perfectly justified in interfering,
otherwise the demonstration against the Greeks would have spread all
over the country, with very serious result.

Our English arm-chair critics—those who do not travel and see the
country for themselves—do not understand the Balkans. They form their
opinions from the incorrect and misleading statements made by
journalists and by journals subsidised by the enemy. Some of the
statements are so absurd as to be amusing, for they are utterly devoid
of the slightest foundation of fact. Indeed, they are often mere tissues
of plausible falsehoods.

While in the Balkans I read extraordinary accounts in the _Zeit_ of
things that, to my own personal knowledge, never happened. Each day, in
fact, the latest brand-new intelligence from the Vienna factory is
served up to Europe with sauce so piquant as to betray its origin.

The greater part of the so-called “news” concerning the Balkans
appearing in the English Press is utterly unreliable. The
correspondents, with few exceptions, are Austrians, and also act as
correspondents of the anti-Servian or anti-Bulgarian papers printed in
Vienna. From Austria these unscrupulous scribblers gain more than from
England, and therefore we are allowed glimpses of the Balkans only
through Austrian spectacles. Spend a week in any Balkan city, and you
will in future heed none of the glib _canards_ you read in your
responsible London morning paper regarding Servia or Bulgaria.

Austria and Turkey are for ever conspiring in the Balkans. Austria has
her eye on Servia, while Turkey intends, if possible, to put her foot
into Bulgaria, or at least to prevent the formation of a “big Bulgaria.”
As far as Turkey is concerned, as long as the Sultan lives there will be
no declaration of war against Bulgaria. His Majesty’s death would, I
fear, be the declaration of war between the two countries—and then the
sallow-faced gentleman in fez and slippers will have an unhappy time.
The day of the Sultan’s death will put the Balkans aflame, and then the
map of the Peninsula will assuredly be very quickly altered.

But before then Bulgaria may declare war.




                                ROUMANIA




[Illustration: HIS MAJESTY KING CHARLES OF ROUMANIA.]




                               CHAPTER I
                          BUCHAREST OF TO-DAY

My friend the spy—How I was watched through the Balkans—An exciting
    half-hour—The Paris of the Near East—Gaiety, extravagance, and
    pretty women—Forty years of progress—The paradise of the
    idler—Husbands wanted!


My friend the spy picked me up at Rustchuk.

He was a well-dressed, middle-aged man, in a black overcoat with a
velvet collar. His face was sharply cut and intelligent, but his dark
eyes were set rather too closely together to suit me. Suddenly I
recollected having seen the same man in the streets of Sofia a week
before. Indeed, I saw him frequently when in the Bulgarian capital, but
until I met him that night upon the Danube steamer, between Rustchuk and
Guirgevo, the thought never occurred to me that the fellow was
persistently following me.

Then, like a flash, each of the occasions I had seen him came back to
me. Not only had he followed me in Sofia, but I now recollected having
seen him in Belgrade and in Zimony. The fellow was a spy—Austrian
without a doubt. It was not my first acquaintance with spies. I had met
many of them in the course of my wanderings up and down Europe. Some,
indeed, are among my personal acquaintances.

Until you travel in the Balkans, and more especially if you are having
interviews with Ministers and officials, you can have no idea of the
audacity and activity of Austria’s secret agents. They swarm everywhere.
The Grand Hotel at Belgrade is full of them, and in Sofia they also
flourish as part of the great secret army which the Austrian Government
keeps in the East, from Zimony right down to Constantinople.

It was a bitterly cold night, with slight drizzling rain. The spy was
standing on deck in the shadow at a little distance from me. The
recollection that I had with me a quantity of official documents given
and lent to me by the Servian and Bulgarian Governments was the reverse
of reassuring. I felt in my pocket for my revolver. Yes, the handy
little weapon was ready for use, in case of necessity.

There were only four or five passengers, and I knew that across the
Danube the Roumanian train taking me on to Bucharest would be
practically empty. And so it proved, for after landing, getting my
passport _viséd_ and my baggage through the Roumanian Customs, I walked
to the train, to find it empty, lit only by dim flickering oil-lamps,
which gave scarcely sufficient light to see into the corners of the
compartments.

I looked back, and yes, surely enough, the spy was following me! I was
alone, for I had sent my servant on to Bucharest by the morning train. I
got into a compartment, and presently, after some manœuvring, he got
in with me. I was annoyed, but I had my weapon in my outside pocket, and
intended to fire through my pocket if he attempted to attack me, or get
at my despatch-box on the seat at my side.

Calmly he lit a cigarette, then inquired in French—which he spoke
excellently—

“M’sieur is going on to Bucharest? Ah! what a wretched train service—eh?
I suppose you go on to Constantinople?”

I looked him straight in the face and replied—

“My destination is no affair of yours, m’sieur. And I have neither
desire nor intention that you should follow me any farther. You must
think I’m blind. I saw you in Servia a dozen times, and in Bulgaria
afterwards, and here you are in Roumania! Your game may be interesting
to yourself, but it is annoying to me, I can assure you—very annoying.”

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Snap-shots in Bucharest.]

The fellow looked aghast. He was not clever at all; for he stammered
something in Hungarian, and then, in French, declared that he had never
followed me. We had met and re-met by accident, he assured me. That was
all.

“Well,” I said, pretty sternly, “just take care that we don’t meet again
by accident after to-night. You understand?” The train was moving, so he
was compelled to travel in the same compartment with me to the next
stopping-place on the fifty-mile run that separates the Danube from the
Roumanian capital.

“I know,” I went on, “that you think I have some official documents with
me that would be extremely interesting to your employers. Yes, I admit I
have had some, but I’m scarcely such a fool as to travel about with
them. They would be interesting reading to you, but fortunately they are
already safe in London. So you are really only wasting your valuable
time, my dear monsieur.”

“M’sieur quite misunderstands me—he takes common politeness for
inquisitiveness.”

“Well, I don’t want any of your polite attentions,” I declared very
bluntly; “and if you don’t get out at the next station I shall just kick
you out. You understand that?”

He saw I had my hand in my jacket-pocket all the time, and doubtless
guessed what I had there.

“I shall stay here,” he answered defiantly.

“Excellent,” was my response. “And when we get to the next station I
shall call the gendarmes and have you arrested as a foreign secret
agent.”

“You’ve made a great mistake,” he declared resentfully.

“Very well. Let’s see. You remain here, and I’ll call the police.”

He did not reply. For half an hour he sat quite silent, while I, fearing
treachery, kept my hand upon the trigger of my weapon, for as a matter
of fact I had with me some papers of the very highest importance to
Austria—papers that would have compromised certain highly-placed persons
in the Balkans. The spy was evidently aware of this, and it was the
motive of his strenuous endeavour to seize an opportunity to get hold of
the confidential statements in question. In Roumania, as in Servia, they
treat foreign spies with scant courtesy, and the fellow’s manner belied
his defiant words.

That half-hour was an exciting one, until at last, after what seemed an
interminable period, the train slowed down and came to a standstill,
when my inquisitive friend of evil intentions descended, and without a
word disappeared in the darkness.

I thought I had rid myself of his surveillance, but I was mistaken. Next
day I met him in the streets of Bucharest, and so persistently did he
follow me that I was compelled to lodge a complaint with the police. As
soon as I had done that, I saw him no more. My own belief was that he
was arrested. He may be in prison now, for all I know. In any case, he
disappeared as completely as though the earth had swallowed him up.

This little incident, both annoying and exciting at the time, was my
first adventure on entering Roumania, but it was soon forgotten amid the
gaieties of smart Bucharest.

The Roumanian capital is a place apart. Roumania is not a Balkan State
in any sense of the word, and has progressed so rapidly during the forty
odd years of its freedom that in Bucharest to-day, save for Roumanian
names over the shopfronts, one may easily believe oneself to be in Paris
or in Brussels.

Indeed, some of the buildings, notably the new Post Office, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, and the Academy, are unequalled not only in
Brussels, but even in Paris. Bucharest is a gay city of external
glitter, bright, merry, and highly amusing after some of the dull,
half-civilised country towns in the Balkans. Smart cafés and
confectioners, expensive hotels, shops that charge double prices of
those in Paris, and theatres where one pays a sovereign for a stall, are
all to be found in Bucharest. The boulevards are broad and full of life
and movement, and the Calea Victoriei, the Boulevard Carol, and Strad
Lipsicani are as busy as any thoroughfare of a Western capital.

Nearly every public building has a dome, while the chief object of a
Roumanian seems to be to build for himself a wonderfully ornate house
and gild the railings in front. Many of the façades of the private
houses are marvels of florid bad taste. Again, though in the streets, in
drawing-rooms and at cafés and theatres, I met hundreds upon hundreds of
officers, crowds of lieutenants, swarms of captains and a good
sprinkling of generals, all in wonderful uniforms, yet I was four days
in Bucharest before I discovered a real soldier—and then quite by
accident. He wore a brown uniform, and I mistook him for a _wagon-lit_
conductor.

Bucharest is a city of vivid contrasts—a wildly gay, go-ahead city,
which justly bears the reputation of being one of the most expensive in
the world. For the poor it is the cheapest; for the rich, the dearest.
Prices, for instance, at the Hotel du Boulevard are higher than at the
Savoy or Carlton in London, yet everything is excellent, the sterlet
quite as good as at the Hermitage at Moscow, and the caviare such as one
only gets in the best restaurants in Russia.

As one wanders in the streets the Western eye meets many quaint sights.
For instance, the _birjas_, or cabs, are open victorias drawn by a pair
of long-tailed Russian horses, and driven by men wearing great padded
overcoats of blue-black velvet—huge affairs that give them very portly
proportions. Around the waist is worn a piece of gaily coloured satin
ribbon,and on the head the round Balkan cap of astrachan. Most of the
drivers are Russian refugees, and form a distinct class apart. Cabs are
extremely cheap, and the rate at which one is driven would be reckless
were it not that the men have such perfect control over their horses.

The British colony is not a large one. Its head is, of course, our
Minister, Sir Conyngham Greene, in whose able hands British interests in
Roumania have recently been placed. Keen and active, he has already
rearranged our Consular service in Roumania, and placed the Legation on
the same footing as those of the other Powers. While every other
European nation owns a Legation house in Bucharest, we have none; and
while I was in the Roumanian capital he was a fellow-guest at the Hotel
du Boulevard. It is understood, however, that the Foreign Office—or the
Treasury—have recently been shamed into the necessity of buying a house,
and very soon Sir Conyngham will have a fitting residence, as the other
representatives of the Powers.

Nobody ever deigns to walk in Bucharest. Everybody takes cabs, therefore
the streets are filled with vehicular traffic till far into the night.
At evening, indeed, Bucharest is at her best. Smart restaurants, with
pretty, well-dressed women, cosy theatres, flash café-chantants, and
noisy garish cafés abound all over the town, while outside, notably at
the Villa Regala, in the centre of a park, smart dinners and suppers are
given.

The _jeunesse dorée_ are an effeminate and extravagant crowd. Gambling
permeates the whole of society, and large sums are lost and won every
evening. I know personally one member of the Roumanian Cabinet who
thinks nothing of losing or winning a couple or three thousand pounds
each week at cards. He plays every afternoon at the Club, and is always
open to play any comer for any stake proposed, no matter what it may be.

Bucharest is a typical capital of a wealthy, easy-going country. The
people are charitable, and spend freely—when they have it. The
shop-windows, where the most expensive table delicacies are displayed,
show the foreigner the Roumanians’ extravagance in eating, while the
dresses one sees on the giddy women-folk are as up to date as any that
one notices in the Champs Elysées, the Bois, or at the Opera. Yet amid
all this up-to-dateness the old horse-tram still survives and jogs
along, and the patient white oxen toil slowly through the streets,
dragging their heavy springless carts.

Unlike Sofia, or in Belgrade, peasants are seldom met with in the
streets of Bucharest. One may go a whole week without coming across a
woman in national costume, unless, of course, the market is specially
visited. I, however, met, in Bucharest, Mr. Harold Hartley, one of the
directors of the Earl’s Court Exhibition, and we made many pleasant
excursions into the country together. To the traveller from Western
Europe the city is highly interesting and full of curious types,
especially of the young elegant, whose present fashion, it seems, is to
shave only the front of his chin and cheeks and grow a beard all round,
very similar in cut to that of a monkey.

[Illustration: The Royal Palace: Bucharest.]

[Illustration: Boulevard Elisabeta: Bucharest.]

When one recollects that about forty years ago Roumania was a
semi-civilised nation, and Bucharest a little Oriental town, its present
size and splendour are astounding. To King Charles’ rule much of this
progress is due, and in order to celebrate the fortieth year of his
reign there has recently been held a very pretty Exhibition, a miniature
of the great Exhibition of Paris. It was, I found, most interesting, and
fortunately it has been decided to preserve several of the more
important buildings, including a really excellent replica of a Roman
amphitheatre. The gaming-room is also to be preserved, of course, for
the “little horses” have great attraction for the merry people of
Bucharest.

Yes, this Paris of the East is indeed a strange place, especially to
those used to Western morals and manners. Everyone lives far above his
income, for there seems no limit to extravagance. Prices are often
extortionate. As an example, I was charged at one restaurant half a
crown for a whisky-and-soda! At a shop across the street the charge for
the same whisky was 6 fr. 50 c. a bottle.

Several of the restaurants are excellent, notably the Enescu, behind the
royal palace, a big place, where the best Tzigane music in Roumania is
provided gratis. The gipsy band is under one Christache Ciolac, a famous
violinist, who one day will no doubt make his mark in London. The
orchestra of the Enescu ought to be imported to one of our smart
restaurants and it would create a great sensation, for our present
so-called Roumanian music cannot be compared with the real thing. Here,
at Enescu’s, there is no dressing up in fancy costumes—not even
dress-coats. But the music is there, the strange weird gipsy melodies
and dances that run in one’s head for days afterwards.

The cookery at Enescu’s, too, is perhaps the best in the Roumanian
capital. Next to it is the restaurant of the Boulevard, where at
luncheon there is a table set apart for the diplomats, and is always
occupied by the various young attachés and secretaries. After that,
comes Capsa’s. The feminine element in the restaurants at dinner is much
the same as it is at home, except that one often sees a mother and two,
or even three, daughters dining alone—dining in public, so that they may
be seen by some stray swain who is desirous of marriage. One night at
Enescu’s, at the table next to us, sat an Italian duchess of ancient
lineage married to a Roumanian aristocrat, with her three pretty
dark-eyed daughters of varying ages, eating solemnly, the mother ever
watchful to see whether any man had his eye upon them. We afterwards saw
them near midnight at a café solemnly sipping _sirops_ and looking
mournful and woebegone. A diplomat who was with me told me that her
Grace had been in Bucharest staying at an hotel for the past six months,
trying to get her daughters off her hands, and was now beginning to be
disgusted at her non-success.

The Roumanian has a great hatred of the Jew. Perhaps it is because his
extravagance brings him so often into their hands. But the country is
full of Hebrews. The capital is not over-burdened with them, but in some
towns in Northern Moldavia Jews are in the majority. Indeed, their total
number in the united provinces exceeds 300,000, or about one-twentieth
of the entire population, a larger ratio than in any other country in
the world. In most provincial towns they have the monopoly of selling
strong drinks, and are of course ever ready to lend money to the
peasant-proprietors. Were it not for the fact that the law forbids any
Jew from holding landed property—or any foreigner, for the matter of
that—half the soil would probably soon be in their hands. The Moldavian
Jews speak a different language, wear a different dress, and keep
themselves aloof from their neighbours, just as do the picturesque
cabmen of Bucharest.

Roumania can boast one artist who is really great, whose name is N. J.
Grigoresco. I was shown some of his works, the property of Mr. Ernest
Goodwin, of the Roumanian Bank, and found that they were of the Barbizon
school, which is very natural, as he was a fellow-worker with Millet.
Without exception the work was excellent, and I believe there is some
idea of having an exhibition of it in London.

In Bucharest there is none of the laziness or languor of the Orient.
Everyone is bent on business or upon pleasure, and life for the idler is
perhaps even more pleasant there than in any other capital of Europe.
Yes, Bucharest of to-day astounds one in many ways.




                               CHAPTER II
                     ROUMANIA’S AIMS AND INTENTIONS

Monsieur Take Jonesco, Minister of Finance—The smartest man in
    Roumania—An interview with General Lahovary, Minister of Foreign
    Affairs—Secret aims of Roumania—A better frontier wanted—Germany’s
    insincerity—Some plain truths—The question of a Balkan
    Federation—Oil wells waiting to be exploited by British capital.


I had a number of interviews with the members of the Roumanian
Cabinet,[2] General Jacques Lahovary, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
M. Take Jonesco, Minister of Finance, being both particularly helpful to
me in my inquiries regarding Roumania’s political aims and aspirations.

-----

Footnote 2:

  Since this volume has been completed the Roumanian Cabinet has
  resigned on account of the recent peasant rising, which, by the way,
  was greatly exaggerated by the Austrian press.

-----

With the President of the Council, with General Manu, Minister of War,
and with M. Jean Lahovary, Minister of Commerce, I also had long and
interesting conversations.

M. Take Jonesco struck me as by far the strongest and shrewdest man in
the present Cabinet. Keen, quick, and far-seeing, he has of recent years
played a prominent part in bringing his country into its present
satisfactory state. Essentially a man of action, a smart politician, and
a patriot, he is nevertheless very English, for he has an English wife,
and his beautiful home is essentially English. Unlike most statesmen in
the East, he is frank and outspoken. He speaks his mind fearlessly, and
the Opposition hold him in terror. Through his good offices I was
afforded facilities for studying various questions and forming my own
conclusions. General Lahovary, too, is a strong and brilliant man
politically, of essentially military bearing, with a clever countenance,
a long grey moustache, and wears a monocle with a tortoise-shell rim.

[Illustration:

  His Excellency GEORGE CANTACUZEN,
  Roumanian Prime Minister.
]

[Illustration:

  His Excellency TAKE JONESCO,
  Roumanian Minister of Finance.
  _Photo_]                [_Elliott & Fry._
]

My audience with him was of an essentially confidential nature. He told
me many interesting things which, for the present, it would be
injudicious to publish, in view of the strained relations between
Bulgaria and Turkey. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is a millionaire’s
palace—huge white-and-gold _salons_, with polished floors, fine
pictures, and beautiful gilt-and-red damask furniture. A showy
millionaire built it as his residence, and died soon afterwards. Then
the Government bought it for an old song, with the result that the
Ministry is housed in more gorgeous quarters than any other Ministry in
Europe.

From my inquiries in various political quarters in Bucharest, both among
members of the Government and the Opposition, I found one unanimous
view, that war between Turkey and Bulgaria over Macedonia must come at
an early date. In Roumania the opinion is that even though a European
prince be appointed Governor-General of Macedonia, the war between the
two countries would only be postponed. It is believed that Bulgaria is
strong, and that the Stancioff policy will be to resist the Turk by arms
within a very few months.

As Bulgaria hates the Turk, so does Roumania. But the latter will not
assist Bulgaria unless she gets some _quid pro quo_. This fact became
very forcibly impressed upon me. Bulgaria cannot attack Turkey without
Roumania’s consent, so the Roumanians declare. And moral support will
only be given on one condition. That is, if Bulgaria, as the result of
the war, annexes any Macedonian territory—as she naturally would do—then
she should cede to Roumania that portion of her territory lying between
the Danube and the Black Sea, taking a line from a little east of
Rustchuk to a little east of Varna. Such condition is certainly not to
be viewed in Bulgaria with any satisfaction, yet as its acceptance would
mean the extension of Bulgaria to the Adriatic, the settlement of the
Macedonian question, and the final destruction of effete Turkey as a
power in Europe, the Bulgarian Cabinet are considering it very
carefully.

Roumania is not over-anxious to extend her territory, but her present
frontier between Rustchuk and the Black Sea is one which she knows it
would be impossible to defend in case of hostilities. She therefore
desires a better frontier, in order that she can hold her own in time of
war. Besides, she naturally will want some of the spoils when the Turks
and Greeks are driven from Macedonia.

The Roumanian policy is one of peace, combined with firmness. General
Lahovary is not a vacillating statesman. His policy is one of progress,
as his action towards Greece over the ill-treatment of Roumanians in
Macedonia has shown. It is intended, no doubt, that the much-vexed
question shall not be settled without Roumania having a hand in it. As
is well known, Germany protects Roumania’s interests in Macedonia.
Through her, the Roumanian schools have been established in Salonica,
Monastir, and other places; but quite recently the good relations with
Germany have been somewhat lessened owing to some friction regarding the
exploitation of the Roumanian oil wells by a German syndicate. The
German intention was to make a trust, which Roumania promptly quashed by
passing a special Act directed against them. It is a curious fact that
since this friction Germany has stood by and witnessed the terrible
atrocities committed by the Greek bands upon the Roumanians in Macedonia
without raising her voice in protest. This, in itself, is sufficient to
make one doubt Germany’s sincerity, and certainly the eyes of the
Roumanians are already pretty wide open to the machinations of Berlin in
the Balkans.

[Illustration:

  His Excellency GEO. G. MANO,
  Roumanian Minister of War.
]

[Illustration:

  SIR CONYNGHAM GREENE,
  British Minister at Bucharest.
  _Photo_]            [_Bassano._
]

The conflict between Roumania and Greece—whatever may be thought of the
very recent discovery of Roumanians in Macedonia—is quite simple. There
are in Macedonia undoubtedly a small percentage of the population which
speaks Roumanian, and who are appealing to their brothers for protection
to allow them to remain Roumanians. In face of this appeal there are two
courses of action possible. One is to reply, “You are of no importance;
you are so few; you are too far away; you cannot expect us to embroil
ourselves in foreign politics for your sake. And besides, our ideals and
our aspirations are different.” The other reply is to adopt the course
which, for the past forty years, all Roumanian Governments have adopted,
namely, to protect and support their subjects abroad and look after
their general interests. Roumania has already done this in Macedonia.
She obtained an irade from the Sultan recognising the Roumanians in
Turkey as a nation apart, and giving them the right to live as
Roumanians. And what has been the result? Bands of Greek _antartes_ at
once crossed into Macedonia and began to assassinate and torture every
Roumanian subject they could lay hands upon. Is it therefore any wonder
that diplomatic negotiations should be broken off between Bucharest and
Athens?

The action of Roumania in pressing for the rights of Roumanians in
Macedonia and in obtaining the irade has, of course, been the subject of
much criticism in the European press. M. Take Jonesco has been
personally criticised as having been the prime mover of the agitation of
the past two years. I mentioned it to him, and he denied that Roumania
had any ulterior motive in Macedonia save to protect her subjects there
and to allow them their own language, their own religion, their own
education, and give them freedom to live as Roumanians. It was absurd,
he declared, to suggest that Roumania intended to acquire territory in
Macedonia, or that the Roumanian Valachs were of only recent discovery.
Their geographical position refuted the first suggestion; and as to the
second, he proved to me that geographers and travellers had written
about them a century ago, one proof being that the English traveller
Leake had mentioned them in his book, published in 1814, saying that the
race in question were undoubtedly Roumanians. Leake also says: “The
Valachs occupy the centre of Macedonia and Thessaly, and nearly all the
Pindre, forming three principal groups.” The Finance Minister also
showed me the evidence collected by the Roumanian writer, Nicholas
Papahagi, and recently issued under the title _Les Roumains de Turquie_.
To me he proved most conclusively that the Roumanian contention was at
least well founded, and that the European critics were incorrect in
supposing that Roumania wants territory in Macedonia. She may have her
eye upon that little strip of Bulgaria in order to strengthen her
frontier, and, I think, quite naturally. She knows that “a big Bulgaria”
is bound to arise. She can never hope to be of equal strength with the
Bulgar. Therefore she wants to entrench herself now that there is a
forthcoming opportunity.

Both General Lahovary and M. Take Jonesco were quite frank with me in
their explanation of Roumania’s future policy. Roumania knows that
nowadays right, if not supported by force, is not might. Grand words, if
not sustained by bayonets, bring serious men into ridicule. During the
past two years the Roumanian army has been improved, consolidated, and
brought into perfection. But their intentions are entirely pacific, even
though they have not hesitated to augment the war budget, and will still
augment it if necessary. Roumania intends to remain passive in the
present Balkan complications, but if she finds it necessary for the
protection of her compatriots in Macedonia she will, like Bulgaria, take
arms against the Turk and drive him back into his capital, and across
into Asia Minor—which is surely the best place for him.

I spoke with several Roumanian statesmen upon the idea of a
Confederation of the Balkan States. Most of them were in accord that
such a thing was within the bounds of possibility, but that it was very
unlikely that Roumania would ever enter such a Confederation. Roumanians
are fond of declaring that their country is not a Balkan State, yet if
such Confederation were formed it seems difficult to see how Roumania
could hold aloof.

[Illustration: GEN. JACQUES LAHOVARY, Roumanian Minister of Foreign
Affairs.]

It is perhaps premature to talk seriously of such a Confederation. In
the various political quarters where I referred to the question, I found
that Roumanians considered it at present very difficult of arrangement,
and very dubious whether Roumania could ever enter it. Events of the
last thirty years have considerably altered the map of Europe, and in
each case smaller States have been amalgamated into kingdoms and
empires, such as Italy and Germany. The saying of King Corvin that “The
kingdom which has not one language is a mad kingdom” is, in our days, no
longer true, Austria being an example. The Serbs, the Bulgars, the
Greeks, and the Roumanians are widely separated by language and by race.
Yet, threatened on the one side by Germany and the other by Austria,
they may, in the near future, find it judicious to combine, as the only
way of preserving their territory and independence. The difficulties of
the problem are, however, many. The Greeks and Bulgars are at drawn
swords, the Roumanians and Greeks have broken off diplomatic
negotiations, and between the Serbs and Bulgars the feeling is not
really so friendly as it should be. At the bottom of all, too, we find
the everlasting question of Macedonia, which, in itself, must prevent a
Confederation. But if it is ever accomplished, then it will take a high
place in the general politics of Europe. Besides, it is improbable that
the Confederation could ever be formed without objections being raised
by the Powers, and it is very likely a great war might result. In
Roumania, therefore, the idea of a Balkan Confederation is not regarded
with great favour. The first question of all is Macedonia—ever
Macedonia, and “the terrible Greek.”

As regards the internal politics of Roumania, they are not within the
scope of this present volume. Both the finance and commerce of the
country seem to be in an excellent state notwithstanding the recent
dissatisfaction of the peasantry. Thanks to the efforts of M. Jonesco,
the finances of the country are now in a thoroughly sound condition, and
every day sees greater prosperity. As I found in Servia and in Bulgaria
openings for British capital, so there is in Roumania also many openings
for British industrial enterprises, especially weaving. The climate is
not favourable for cotton-spinning, but for weaving there are many
enterprises that would pay good dividends.

In the petroleum wells there have been, since their discovery fifteen
years ago, about 150,000,000 francs of foreign capital invested. Greater
part of this is German, but there is also a French, Italian, and Dutch
element in the various companies exploiting the wells. The Standard Oil
Company of America have about 15,000,000 francs invested, but there is
no British enterprise. The oil is refined in Roumania, but a good deal
of crude oil is sent to France, as well as great quantities of benzine.

From Turn Severin, on the western border of the country, the petroleum
zone can be distinctly traced at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains,
skirting them in their course through the country towards Bukovina and
Galicia on the north-east. Along the whole length of this zone are
primitive hand-dug wells, the workings prior to 1873, when the American
oilfields were discovered. Since 1895, however, a new stimulus was given
to the industry by the modification of the mining laws, and from that
date the oil industry has been gradually increasing, and only awaits the
introduction of British capital to develop the enormous oil-fields.

It is claimed that the Roumanian petroleum contains 14, 15 and 25 per
cent. more pure oil than American, Galician, or Caucasian oils
respectively. The total production in 1905 was 602,000 tons, or double
the production of four years ago, while the export has nearly doubled in
the past two years. The Deutcher and Dresden Banks and the Disconto
Gesellschaft have about three million and a half pounds invested in it,
while a new company, called the “Trajan,” with a capital of £200,000,
has recently been formed, of which Marmorosch, Blank, & Co. of
Bucharest, the principal promoters, have taken two-fifths. It will
absorb the “Helios” and several other minor companies.

Very large areas of the Roumanian oil-fields are the property of the
State, and have hitherto been unworked, but the Minister of Commerce,
when I questioned him upon the subject, informed me that a law recently
passed by the Chamber provides for the leasing of these lands to private
companies, though important provisos are introduced in order to prevent
monopolies. The Minister explained to me the chief points of the new
laws, and as they may interest British capitalists, I give them. It
appears that the Government may now lease for a period of fifty years
prospected or unprospected land of maximum areas of 100 and 1000
hectares respectively. The concession is granted to the party offering
the highest rent. No more than three lots can be leased to one
concessionaire. The capital, which must be at least 2,000,000 francs for
every 100 hectare lot of prospected land or 1000 hectares of
unprospected land, must be deposited. Amalgamation or assignment is
illegal, and any secret fusion involves loss of the concession. The
State reserves to itself the exclusive right of working all means of
transport for petroleum, and will take a compensation of at least 10 per
cent. on the gross profit of the working. Over and above that rent, the
State participates in the net profits of the working as follows: (1)
one-third should the net profit fluctuate between 10 and 30 per cent.;
(2) from 30 and more per cent., the share of the State is 50 per cent.
of the net profits. The State levies upon concessionaires a lease-charge
of 20 francs per hectare, and in addition the general taxes are to be
paid. All concessions are subject to Roumanian laws and regulations, and
the State assumes no responsibility for the profitableness of land
leased.

These conditions are certainly onerous, yet there is no doubt a big
field for British capital in Roumanian oil. The Minister of Commerce
impressed upon me this fact, and declared that he would give every
facility to intending concessionaires, providing they were properly
introduced, and were persons who meant serious business.

In the words of our Consul-General at Galatz, “It is not very easy to
account for the apathy of British capitalists in seeking openings in
Roumania. Perhaps its position in the remote corner of Europe, and
perhaps the difficulties of language have something to do with it.”
Anyhow, there is a big future before the oil industry in Roumania, and
it is amazing that no one has yet had the courage to try the business
under the new conditions. As the Minister pointed out, “The American
Standard Oil Company are already firmly established in Roumania. Why
should not an English company also work the fields?”

The future, and not a far-distant one, will no doubt see many of the
wells exploited by British capital.

In Roumania there are also salt mines sufficient to supply the whole
world. The coal deposits are not numerous, but iron and copper are known
to exist, though they are not yet exploited.

I had an opportunity of examining the commercial statistics for the
present year, not yet published, and they showed on the exports an
augmentation on each of the past six years of considerably over 100
million francs. This, in itself, speaks volumes for the prosperity of
this the most civilised and progressive nation of the Orient, which has,
no doubt, a greater and far more brilliant future before it.

[Illustration: HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF ROUMANIA.]




                              CHAPTER III
                   A CHAT WITH THE QUEEN OF ROUMANIA

The royal drawing-room—Her Majesty’s greeting—Her kind words of
    welcome—Roumania not in the Balkan States—We talk politics—The name
    of “Carmen Sylva”—The Queen’s deep interest in the blind—She shows
    me some photographs—Public interest in the new institution—I visit
    it next day.


I was standing one Sunday evening in the great drawing-room of the royal
palace at Bucharest, chatting with Madame Zoe Bengesco, lady-in-waiting
to the Queen of Roumania.

Madame Maurojeni, _grande-maîtresse_ of Her Majesty’s Court, had
appointed my audience for half-past six, and as the bowing liveried
servants had conducted me through the great entrance and up the large
red-carpeted horse-shoe staircase, I was struck with the old-fashioned
comfort, combined with taste, everywhere displayed.

While chatting with Madame Bengesco, who was inquiring after some mutual
friends in Belgrade, I glanced around the great salon or salons—for
there are two of equal proportions, the one running at right angles with
the other. Splendid old brocade-covered furniture, tables with
interesting knick-knacks, a grand piano, the fine organ upon which Her
Majesty so often plays, beautiful hangings, magnificent paintings upon
the walls and old Persian rugs upon the polished floor, all combined,
under the soft electric light, to produce a harmony of quiet taste and
luxury.

The salons were huge, high-ceilinged, and splendid, yet there was an air
of homeliness about them, and indeed about the whole palace, that I have
not found in other royal palaces of Europe wherein I have been received.
The great quiet room bore traces of the artistic hand of Her Majesty
herself.

I had asked for audience not without some misgiving, for His Majesty the
King was lying very ill, and the Queen—the “Carmen Sylva” of European
literary fame—was at his bedside always, administering to her sick
husband’s wants, nursing him, and reading aloud to him for hours each
day. For weeks she had given audience to no one, therefore it was a
pleasant surprise when Madame Maurojeni told me that the Queen was going
to make an exception in my case.

I was chatting with Madame Bengesco, and suddenly turned to find Her
Majesty—a tall, fine figure _en décolletée_, a sweet smile of welcome
upon her face—standing before me. She wore a very handsome gown of pale
dove-grey _crêpe-de-chine_, but no jewellery save a single gold bracelet
and one or two very fine rings.

“So you have come to see our country, Mr. N——?” Her Majesty exclaimed in
English, smiling pleasantly, after I had made my obeisance, and she had
shaken hands with me. “Come, let us sit over in that corner. It is more
cosy.” And she conducted me to a luxurious little corner of the salon,
while the lady-in-waiting retired.

I began by thanking Her Majesty for giving me audience at such a time of
anxiety.

“I have just left the King to come to you,” she answered. “He is very
much better, I am thankful to say, and yesterday took a little
nourishment. Ah yes, it has been a most anxious time for me. You will
forgive me if I am a little tired, won’t you? When I heard you were in
Bucharest I determined to meet you. I have heard of you, long ago, you
know! Now, tell me, what brings you to Roumania?”

I explained that my confidential mission was to inquire into the future
of the Balkans, whereupon she interrupted me with that sweet laugh that
is one of her characteristics, saying—

“Ah, you must never include us in the Balkan States, recollect! We
Roumanians speak another language; the Danube separates us from the
Balkans, and we have nothing in common with the races on the other side
of the river. The reason why we are not taking part in this year’s
Exhibition at your Earl’s Court is because they have called it ‘The
Balkan Exhibition.’”

I laughingly promised to be very careful on the point in future. As she
sat before me, the handsome, thoughtful countenance, the white hair
brushed straight back, and the soft and very becoming head-dress, Her
Majesty was surely the most picturesque, the most interesting, and
perhaps the most accomplished and intelligent of the Queens of Europe.

I told her of my journey through Northern Albania, in which she was
deeply interested, and asked me lots of questions. Then I explained how
I was on my way to Constantinople and through Macedonia, whereupon she
made a quick gesture with her hands, and exclaimed—

“Then you are studying Macedonia! Ah, what a very difficult task you
have! We have Roumanians in Macedonia, as you know—and, poor people,
they are being treated very badly. What the outcome of it all is to be,
who can tell? There are so many conflicting peoples, so many conflicting
interests, so much jealousy among the Powers.”

“Ah! I see that your Majesty takes an interest in politics!” I
exclaimed.

“No. You are mistaken,” she answered. “I, of course, know the general
outlines of most of the subjects, but I am a woman, and am not expected
to be a politician. My sphere lies in endeavouring to do good to the
people, to ameliorate their sufferings, and to look after my various
charitable institutions.”

Surely the name of Carmen Sylva—that sweet-faced, womanly woman who,
though a queen, is so charming and unassuming—is synonymous with all
that is good and charitable. For Roumania, she has done what no other
woman has done. Nearly all the charity of the country has been
initiated, and partly supported, by her efforts. She lives her life for
the poor and needy, and has worked hard for years on their behalf.

In society in Bucharest I had heard some talk of her great interest in
the blind, and that one of her protégés, himself a blind man, had
invented a machine by which the Braille type for blind-books could be
printed by type, instead of, as hitherto, being embossed by hand. This
subject I referred to, when at once her eyes shone with enthusiasm and
she said—

“Then if you would like to know all about it, Mr. N——, I’ll tell you. It
all came about in this way. Some years ago I had, as copyist, a servant,
quite a poor man. His young wife and his children had died, and, poor
fellow, he was in the greatest depths of despair when I took him into my
service. So I gave him very hard work to do, in order that his mind
should be occupied and he should forget. Well, time went on, and I was
always much interested in the welfare of the blind, when one day this
servant came to me and told me that a certain blind man named
Theodorescu, whom we had rescued, was making experiments whereby the
Braille books could be multiplied by printing, and thus place reading
and instruction in the hands of every blind person in the world. This, I
saw, would mean light in the darkness of the afflicted, so we provided
the poor fellow with means to perfect his invention, with the result
that he produced a rough and somewhat incomplete process. This was then
taken over by Mr. Monske, an old servant of mine, who worked here in a
room in the palace for over a year trying to perfect the machine. We
made no mention of it to a soul, but kept it a dead secret, until at
last success came, and now it is patented over the whole world—the first
complete machine for printing books for the blind!”

“Have you many blind in Roumania?” I asked.

“They say we have twenty thousand. But I believe we have many more,
because already in Bucharest the police have discovered for me many more
than were shown upon their statistics. But let me tell you what the
outcome of this invention is, and what it will be,” the Queen went on.
“I have recently started a small blind institution, where the books will
eventually be printed. I might tell you that some time ago, before the
invention was perfected, we sent for an American machine, a cumbersome
affair, which cost three thousand francs. Our machine will cost only
three hundred francs. A Vienna firm wished to manufacture them, but I
preferred that they should be made here, in Roumania. Well, our small
institution—which is under the direction of Mr. Monske and his wife—is
already in working order. See”—and she rose and took me across the
salon, where there were a number of photographs arranged in a big frame
surmounted by the royal crown and cipher, copies of which are reproduced
in these pages.

[Illustration: The Queen of Roumania’s Blind Institute in Bucharest.]

“Here, you see, are some pictures which the photographer very kindly
sent me. Aren’t they interesting? Here is the first child we found. He’s
an intelligent little chap, with musical instincts evidently, for I was
told a few days ago that he had been found trying to play four
instruments at once! Here you see them basket-making—here they are
having a concert—and here is a group—and so on. Aren’t they
interesting?” she asked enthusiastically. “And to think that they were
nearly all found as beggars. Some are men who have been in good
positions. That man was an officer, for instance!”

Then Her Majesty went back to her seat, and I reseated myself with her.

“The present institution is only the beginning,” she said. “I have a
scheme for establishing a city for the blind—a model town, to which the
blind of every nation may come and work, and support themselves. Now I
will tell you something about it. When it was known that I intended to
do this, people came forward on every hand to give me assistance. One
gentleman gave me 100,000 francs, while a lady has given me the site for
the city near Sinaia, a beautiful place where, close by, we have a
castle. The site is an ideal one, and very shortly we shall lay it out
with model houses built in modern style, in which two families can live.
We do not wish to separate a blind man from his family, but the kitchens
will be in common, so that the wife may be relieved of much of her
household duties and afforded time to work and earn money.”

“We have several model villages in England, your Majesty,” I remarked.
“The one called Port Sunlight might interest you. I could perhaps get
photographs from Mr. Lever, who built it.”

“Oh, do. It would be so kind of you. Will you ask him?” she said. “I
might get some excellent ideas from Mr. Lever’s scheme. Of course we
must have a working men’s club, a concert hall, a church, and recreation
room.”

“And what does your Majesty call your present institution?”

“In Roumanian it is ‘The Hearth of Light,’ but in English it would be
better translated as ‘The Home of Light.’ Would you like to visit it?”

“I should be delighted,” I replied.

“Then Monske shall call for you and show you everything. Remember that
the people are not paupers. From the first day they come to us they
receive one franc a day, which is increased according to the skill they
show in chair-making, basket-making, rope-making, and other such
industries. As regards the blind city scheme, Mrs. Fern, wife of a
former American Minister here, is starting for the United States in a
few days, and is taking one of the new machines with her, and is going
to hold conferences and explain the scheme in the principal cities of
America. You see now, for the first time, education is fully open to the
blind. The books will be printed as easily as other books, and will be
within the reach of all. It is a splendid thing—and I am happy to say
that I am receiving donations from every side. I have worked for years,
and now the people are, I am gratified to think, appreciating my efforts
in the cause of humanity. Yesterday Monske came to me and showed me 500
francs he had that day received. I held up notes for 7000 francs, which
I had also received. One firm has sent me a magnificent organ, and I
have even poor families subscribing a franc a month towards the blind.
Does not that show that in the hearts of the people there is a corner
for the poor afflicted? But remember that the blind colony is to be open
to all nationalities. It is a big undertaking, I admit; for I have in
Roumania twenty thousand people and their families. Yet the scheme will
work, I am confident. And while they are now in penury, they will soon
be educated, and be able to place themselves, by their work, in a
position of independence.”

For over an hour we chatted together, until, after promising to send me
a signed photograph of herself and of the King, she rose, saying—

“I am so delighted to have had a chat with you, Mr. N——. I will send Mr.
Monske to you in the morning. But the King is alone, and will want me to
read again to him, so I must go.” And Her Majesty, smiling graciously,
gave me her hand, saying, “_Au revoir._”

I bowed over it, thanked her for the audience, and retired, charmed by
her marvellous personality, her sweet silver voice, her kindly manner,
and her queenly bearing, all of which combined to create an impression
which will always remain with me—an hour spent with a woman who is
unique in the whole world.

Next day Her Majesty sent me the autographed photograph which appears on
another page, together with a very charming note of thanks for a slight
service I had been able to render her.

One morning a few days later, by the Queen’s order, I was shown over her
Blind Institute, which is called the “Vatra Luminoasa Regina Elizaveta,”
and is in the Boulevardul Carol, in Bucharest.

A large comfortable house, standing back from the road in its own
grounds, it is the first institution to be founded under the new scheme,
and the nucleus of what will most certainly become a great and important
charitable work. Mr. Monske, the Director, a pleasant-faced, youngish
man, with a bright, open expression, received me, in the business-like
office, where a blind typist was busy with correspondence, using a
Remington machine with celluloid caps on each third key.

“Ah!” exclaimed the poor afflicted typist in French, “you do not know
what this place means to us! Take myself, for example. I was a clerk in
an office here, in Bucharest, and eight years ago I went totally blind.
My life after my misfortune was one of misery. I was in the depths of
despair, for the blind are not wanted on the earth. And then came the
good Queen, and saved me. My story is the same as all of us here—lifted
out of despair and placed in a position of comfort and independence, for
all of us are paid for our work.”

The poor clerk seemed thankful from the very bottom of his heart. He was
full of praise of Her Majesty’s great goodness, and the kindness of the
private persons helping her. Of Mr. Monske he sang praises, and then
when he was told who and what I was, he asked me in the name of his
fellow-inmates of the Institute to tell the English what a grand and
noble work “Carmen Sylva” was doing.

Mr. Monske then took me to the music-room, a large bright apartment with
a fine organ,—the gift of a blind Austrian gentleman,—two pianos, and
other musical instruments. On the walls were the portraits of the King
and Queen, while the floor was of polished oak. Here, one afternoon each
week, Her Majesty comes, accompanied by her ladies-in-waiting and some
friends, and gives the blind inmates and their families a musical
entertainment. Thus the Queen keeps the Institute under her own personal
supervision.

In another room—a play-room—I saw a homely-looking woman playing with a
little blind child of four years, while the oldest inmate I saw was
about sixty. The dormitories for the thirty-two inmates that were there
at the time of my visit were scrupulously clean and very airy. Each man
had his bed, his washstand, his lock-up wardrobe, while the floors
everywhere were covered with linoleum.

I was taken to a long new building, just erected in the grounds, which
is being fitted as a rope-works. There is room for thirty men to work
with ease. Close beside it is about to be erected a private chapel,
given by a gentleman in Bucharest, while on the other side of the house
I was shown the chair-making workshops, the overseer of which was a
blind man himself. Here, while some were expert menders of cane chairs,
others were being taught the trade. The Director explained that he had
just signed a big contract with a firm of chair-makers, and showed me
the hundreds upon hundreds of frames ready to go into the hands of the
blind.

[Illustration: Blind Inmates at Work.]

The last department I was shown was that in which the new Theodorescu
machine was being used to emboss blind-books. It is an interesting and
ingenious method by which the type, consisting of small blunt pins, is
set in a brass frame very similar to ordinary type, and is set indeed by
the blind themselves. Then, when a frame is full, it is put into a
special press, and any number of impressions can be taken from the
embossing-pins.

Mr. Monske first reduces the printed book to embossed Braille
characters, and these are set up by the blind compositors, and
impressions taken very rapidly. I was shown bulky volumes of well-known
works that have already been printed in this manner and now, for the
first time, given to the blind. Recently Mr. Monske made a tour to the
various blind institutions in France, Austria, and Germany, and without
any prospectus, sold 140 of the machines. It certainly is a simple but
most ingenious invention, which in the future will bring great profits
to the Queen’s blind colony.

As regards private subscriptions, I was shown the list. They range from
50 centimes to £4000. On the day previous to my visit it was shown by
the list that Her Majesty had received over 5000 francs in donations.
Funds are coming in, it is true, but for the development of the scheme a
large sum is required. It is for that reason that Her Majesty is making
an earnest appeal all over the world to those interested in the welfare
of the blind. Her great institution—of which this is only the nucleus—is
an international one, and men and their families of all creeds and
nationalities are eligible. Her Majesty has asked me to say that
subscriptions, however small, can be sent either to Madame Zoe Bengesco,
Dame d’Honneur to the Queen of Roumania, Bucharest, or to Mr. R. Monske,
Director “Vatra Luminoasa Regina Elizaveta,” Boulevardul Carol 31,
Bucharest, and would be duly acknowledged.




                                 TURKEY




[Illustration:

  HIS EXCELLENCY TEWFIK PASHA,
  Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Imperial Ottoman Empire.
]




                               CHAPTER I
                      THE LAND OF THE WANING MOON

The Orient Express again—On the Black Sea to Constantinople—A
    disenchantment—My dragoman—How to bribe the Customs officers—Mud and
    dogs—A city of spies—Feebleness of British policy at the
    Porte—Turkish adoration of Germany—The basis of my confidential
    inquiries.


From Bucharest to Constantinople is not at all an unpleasant journey.

The Orient Express runs twice a week to Constantza, the Roumanian port
on the Black Sea, where there is a fine and comfortable
passenger-steamer service direct to Constantinople.

At Bucharest Station I was seen off by several kind friends, with many
parting injunctions to “take care of myself” in Macedonia, and it was
not without regret that I left the gay little Roumanian capital, where I
had received so much hospitality, from Her Majesty the Queen down to
some of the humblest of her subjects.

The “Orient,” on the Constantza line, is not so well fitted, nor is the
food so good, as upon the direct line from Paris to Constantinople by
way of Belgrade and Sofia.

The whole train was shabby, dusty, and over-heated, and the dinner,
instead of the usual _table d’hôte_, was _à la carte_. The only item on
the bill of fare, however, proved to be beef-steak. The small piece
cooked for me was fit only for a dog, and served on a dirty tablecloth;
therefore I was compelled to make my dinner off stale bread and soapy
cheese. And this on a _train de luxe_—and one of the principal European
Expresses!

The Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits et Grand Express Européenes
are not very considerate towards travellers to the East. There is
neither competition in sleeping accommodation nor buffets, therefore the
rolling-stock is often old-fashioned and dirty, and the food leaves very
much to be desired. Surely upon a journey of three or four days, the
maximum degree of comfort should be secured! Why should the traveller
who spends one night between Calais and Nice be better provided for than
he who goes East from Ostend to Constantinople—a four days’ journey?

In the “Orient,” the old-fashioned coal-fire heating in every carriage
is still in vogue, and consequently the person who is unfortunate enough
to have a berth near the stove is half roasted, while he who is at the
farther end is half frozen. The traveller who goes East would certainly
welcome the up-to-date _wagons-lits_ of the Mediterranean or Carlsbad
Expresses.

I travelled in the “Orient” from Paris to Vienna, from Belgrade to
Sofia, from Bucharest to Constantza, and from Nisch in Servia to Paris,
and on each of the trains were the same defects in sleeping comfort, and
often in food.

It is to be hoped that the Company will shortly remedy this, for on some
of their routes, notably Calais-Paris, or Paris-Marseilles, the food is
all that can be desired.

The Express, after passing the wonderful bridge over the Danube, arrives
at the quay at Constantza, or Kustendji, as is its local name, at eleven
o’clock at night, where the mails from London and Vienna are quickly
transferred on board, and we are soon under steam, with the flashing
light of Cape Tusla fast disappearing at the stern.

The steamer _King Charles_ makes the voyage from Constantza to
Alexandria, calling at Constantinople, and is a very comfortable and
up-to-date boat, with excellent state-rooms and a fine saloon, and
ladies’ drawing-room. Officers and men are Roumanians, but as the head
steward speaks French there is no difficulty. An excellent supper at
midnight, with Roumanian white wine, caviare, and a glass of
_slivovitza_ to follow, and then a stroll on the deck in the white
moonlight.

Past the Kamara and Shabaloh lights, we at last see the broad rays from
the Kali Akra, and then we head straight out upon the lonely sea for the
Bosphorus. One by one, the tired travellers, some of them from Ostend,
Berlin, or Petersburg, make for their berths, and finding myself alone,
I turn into the comfortable deck cabin kindly secured for me by telegram
by my friend the Minister of Finance in Bucharest.

Rising early, I was already out on deck and taking photographs as we
passed the two Turkish forts, Kilia and Poiraz, at the narrow entrance
to the Bosphorus. And after stopping to take up our pilot, we crept
slowly up the narrow channel amid delightful scenery, some of which I
photographed and have reproduced in these pages, past the pretty summer
resort of Therapia and Anatoli Hissar, until we approached the capital
of Turkey, with her hundred domes and minarets, looking almost like a
fairy city against the blue cloudless sky as we approached.

But what a disenchantment on landing! That terrible rabble at Galata in
the midst of dirt and squalor, of shouting touts, scrambling porters,
and scavenger dogs, is a thing to be ever remembered. Fortunately, I had
a Greek dragoman, one Demosthenes Cambothecras, to meet me. I can
recommend him as an excellent and honest fellow, and to the intending
traveller I may say that a letter addressed to the Pera Palace Hotel
will always find him.

He stood on the quay amid the thousand off-scum of Constantinople, and
shouted my name. I shouted back, and ten minutes later we met. When I
gave him over my baggage ticket, he said—

“The customs here, m’sieur, are difficult. But, with your permission, I
will give the officer five francs.”

I assented readily, and my luggage was passed without inquiry, while
that of a bespectacled Hungarian next me was examined piece by piece,
greatly to the disgust and consternation of his obese wife.

I saw no money pass in the shabby, shed-like Custom House, but he told
me that the chief of the Customs employed an agent out in the street to
receive his bribes! So much for the morality of the Custom dues in
Turkey. In that very same week the British Ambassador had made protest
to the Sublime Porte regarding the same thing, but was promptly “snuffed
out” by the all-influential Power, Germany.

Germany and German interests are always paramount in Turkey. If you are
an Englishman, you may take a back seat and endure all your passport
worries, but the German is, by the Turk, supposed to be his friend.
German diplomacy is clever, wary, and unscrupulous, and in the Sultan’s
capital you are treated with deference if you are a subject of the
Kaiser William.

And how strange and ridiculous it all is! Germany intends ere long to
wipe Turkey off the face of Europe—only Turkey cannot see it. She is
fascinated and spellbound by German cringing and German goodwill, all
pretence, and all directed towards the one end of traitorous
abandonment.

Great Britain, notwithstanding her fine Embassy, is entirely eclipsed by
the big white palace overlooking the Bosphorus which houses the German
Ambassador. Tewfik Pasha, the Sultan’s Minister for Foreign Affairs,
lives beneath its shadow, and the Turks look upon Germany as their
natural protector and friend. A British protest to the Porte passes
unheeded, while a German protest receives attention and adjustment the
very next day. A German diplomatist at the Sublime Porte told me this
with a roar of laughter, adding—

“We are the only diplomatists here. We are listened to. You are merely
tolerated.”

And verily he spoke a great truth.

Our big grey Embassy in Pera, with its gorgeous Montenegrin _kavass_,
may be extremely ornamental and impressive, but nowadays of little use.
The British taxpayer is paying for the glorification of Great Britain
without one single farthing’s worth of benefit. The Turkish
Government—clever as they are—laugh in the face of our persevering and
well-meaning Ambassador. They give him, or his representative, cups of
rather badly-made coffee in Tewfik’s shabby anteroom at the Sublime
Porte, and put their fingers to their noses behind his back. It is not
the fault of our Ambassador, or of his staff. All of them are practised
diplomatists, who endeavour to their utmost to do their duty to King and
Country, and to protect British interests in the East. The fault lies in
the timid policy and shrinking politeness adopted by our present
Government. The late lamented Lord Salisbury, or Lord Beaconsfield,
would never for a moment have submitted to the open rebuffs which Great
Britain daily meets with nowadays at Constantinople.

The Turk knows that Germany is behind him, and is therefore defiant. So
British diplomacy is beaten every time.

Constantinople swarms with spies. If you have ever been there, and
landed from a steamer, you will recollect that a crowd of unwashed
porters swarm on board directly the ship is made fast. Every man of that
ragged rabble is a spy. He is only allowed on board on condition that he
gives information to the Custom officers ashore as to any concealment of
revolvers, books, or prohibited articles. Respectable dragomans are
constantly asked to assist in this, and offered monetary reward, as well
as a permit to board the ship, but they refuse—and leave the espionage
to the rabble.

And so it is all through the Turkish capital. Spies are everywhere—they
haunt one in all the hotels, even in the much-advertised Pera Palace—and
every movement of the stranger is noted. If you happen to be a German
and have shown your passport in the Custom House, then you go hither and
thither and do whatever you like. But if you are of any other
nationality you will be suspected and haunted by all sorts and
conditions of secret agents, until you kick the mud of Constantinople
off your boots.

I have been more than once in the Sultan’s capital, and on each
occasion, on entering it, have been seized with a fit of depression,
which has only been removed when I have got my passport _viséd_ by the
British Consul-General, and also by the Turkish police, preliminary to
leaving the place.

The squalor in Galata, in Stamboul, and even in aristocratic Pera,
sickens one. The streets, unswept for ages, are an inch deep in slimy
mud, upon which one slides and slips at every step, and the grey,
wolf-like dogs, held sacred by every Turk, prowl about in hordes, each
in their own quarter, living in the streets and sleeping in doorways.

Constantinople, with the most picturesque and beautiful position in all
the world, is the most filthy and uncomfortable of all cities. With the
exception of the Grande Rue, at Pera, there is scarcely a single decent
European business street. Every thoroughfare is crowded to excess by a
motley throng of Mohammedans, both European and Asiatic, and every form
of costume and physiognomy, from the Tartar to the Syrian, may be seen.

The pilgrimages were leaving for Mecca while I was there, and the whole
city was filled with the Faithful from every part of the great Moslem
world. The bridge at Galata was daily a perfect panorama of costume as
the pilgrims assembled to embark.

Though I spent a little time in the great Bazaar—which is always
attractive to the traveller from the West—and revisited Saint Sophia and
other of the big mosques, my days in Constantinople were mostly occupied
in having interesting chats with the heads of the Turkish Government.

I carried letters of introduction to His Excellency Tewfik Pasha, the
Sultan’s Minister of Foreign Affairs; to the Grand Vizier of the Sultan;
to d’Aristarchi Bey, the Grand Logothete; to His Excellency Noury Pasha,
Under-State Secretary for Foreign Affairs; to the British Chargé
d’Affaires, Mr. Geo. H. Barclay—the Ambassador being absent on leave; to
His Excellency Monsieur George Simitch, the Servian Minister; to M.
Dimetri Vlastari, the well-known banker; to Mehemed Ali Pasha; to Riza
Pasha, Minister of War; and to many other of the leading people in the
Turkish capital.

Thus I was enabled to go thoroughly into the present state of affairs. I
was granted an audience of His Majesty the Sultan, as well as by the
Grand Vizier, by Tewfik Pasha, the Khardjie-Naziri, and had many
interviews with the persons named above.

My inquiries were mainly directed to ascertaining—first, what attitude
Turkey was assuming towards Macedonia; secondly, whether the Turks were
alive to the firm intention of Bulgaria for the protection of her
subjects, and in what manner they viewed the prospect of hostilities;
thirdly, the truth about the Macedonian reforms; fourthly, the extent of
German intrigue in Constantinople; fifthly, the Turkish policy towards
Austria; and sixthly, the policy towards Great Britain.

I went to the Porte in order to penetrate the veil of mystery
surrounding diplomacy there, and to get at the true state of affairs.
The task was very difficult, for in the East one is hardly ever told the
real facts about anything. Nevertheless, unique opportunities were
afforded me to obtain knowledge by the absolute facts and the future
aims of both Turkey and Germany—opportunities of which, as will be shown
in the following pages, I was not slow in taking advantage.

In view of the present situation in Turkey, the proclamation of the
“Ottoman Committee of Union and Progress,” which was found posted upon
all the walls of the Pera quarter of Constantinople on January 1 of this
present year, is of great interest in showing the present state of
public feeling in the Turkish capital.

This proclamation, which was issued by a very strong and formidable
party in Turkey, began by stating that Abdul Hamid, after thirty years
of impunity, was now on the verge of death. The fact that now and then
he gives audience of a few minutes’ duration to an Ambassador, or that
at the weekly Selamlik he drives to the mosque, a few yards from his
palace, proves nothing. The Sultan Mahmud fell dead from his horse,
returning from the Selamlik; while the Sultan Medjid was on his feet up
to the very last. In reality Abdul Hamid, knowing the profound effect
which his failure to attend the Selamlik would have upon the people, is
expending all the energies that remain to him in fulfilling this
religious observance and in granting an occasional interview to a
foreign Ambassador.

The proclamation proceeded:—

  “During the thirty years of his reign Abdul Hamid has brought ruin on
  the land; one half of our patrimony he has delivered to the enemy; he
  has destroyed our fleet, disorganised our army; he has reduced the
  people to misery; he has annihilated our governmental system, and has
  left nothing to the civil organisation or the civilisation of the
  past. He has concentrated the whole government into his own hands, and
  has dismissed all his tried and experienced Ministers, transferring
  the reins of office to self-seekers and traitors willing to become his
  tools.”

Grave troubles are predicted after his death, and the Committee urges
the population of the Empire, Christian and Mussulman, to be on their
guard and to consider seriously the following facts:—

  “(1) Abdul Hamid and his accomplices are conspiring to hand over the
  sovereignty and the Caliphate to his fourth son, the youth,
  Burhaneddin, in defiance of the tradition and the civil and religious
  law of the Empire. The success of this stratagem would be a mortal
  blow to the aspirations of the nation.

  “(2) To prevent the enemies of the country from provoking disorders in
  order to bring about foreign intervention, guarantees must be given to
  the Christian populations and, if necessary, written assurances to the
  Embassies.

  “(3) The happiness and the future of the country being dependent upon
  the suppression of the despotic régime and the enforcing of the
  Constitution, which was recognised in 1876 as an inalienable right of
  the nation, and after being two years in operation was perfidiously
  abrogated by Abdul Hamid, our fellow-countrymen, Christian and
  Mussulman, must of one accord exact the application of that
  Constitution, which will restore to the country its vitality and
  safeguard the liberties of the people. United in heart and mind, the
  Ulemas, the notables of the capital and the provinces, must, through
  the intermediary of the Grand Vizier and the Valis, demand of the new
  Sultan that he proclaim and bring into force without delay the clauses
  of the Constitution.

  “(4) The duty of preserving the essential rights of the nation
  belongs, above all, to the members of the guild of the Ulemas and to
  the high civil and military officials; the ceremony of the Biat, when
  the chosen of the people demonstrate the popular sovereignty by
  recognising and accepting the new Sultan, is the most propitious
  occasion for the exercise of that duty. It is an obligation that lies
  upon every Turkish subject to exact a pledge from the delegate he
  sends up to do his duty on that occasion.”

The Manifesto ended with an appeal to the Christian and non-Christian
populations to prepare for the coming crisis.




                               CHAPTER II
                         IN SEARCH OF THE TRUTH

His Excellency Noury Pasha—A quiet chat at his home—Turkish view of
    European criticism—The Turk misunderstood—The massacres in
    Macedonia—My visit to the Sublime Porte—His Excellency Tewfik Pasha
    tells me the truth—A great diplomatist—The fashion to denounce
    Turkey—The attitude of the Porte towards Bulgaria—Significant words.


The first visit I paid was to His Excellency Mehmed Noury Pasha,
Secretary-General of the Imperial Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who is
one of the most advanced and progressive of Turks, and who, next to
Tewfik Pasha, the Sultan’s Foreign Minister, is one of the most powerful
men in Turkey.

As such, it may be interesting to note that he was born in
Constantinople, and having made his early studies in that city, was sent
by the Sultan to Paris, where he underwent a long course of training,
returning to occupy the post of Inspector in the Ministry of Public
Works. Afterwards, he became Director-General, and subsequently his
perfect knowledge of French brought him again before the notice of the
Sultan, who appointed him to the office of Secretary-General in the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, a position which he has held for the past
eighteen years.

Through his hands all diplomatic correspondence passes, and to him is
mainly due the clever and tactful diplomacy of the Porte. His is,
indeed, a delicate and laborious task.

[Illustration: HIS EXCELLENCY NOURY PASHA.]

He is a slim, fair-bearded, middle-aged man of very charming manner, and
a delightful companion; shrewd, full of tact and clear discernment.
Times without number he has given proof of assiduous work for his
country’s advancement, and no one knows better than he the defects of
Turkish rule.

By no means bigoted, he is, on the contrary, broad-minded and eager for
reform. He was sent by the Sultan to represent him at Rome at the silver
wedding of the King and Queen of Italy in 1893, and later, was one of
the Peace delegates at the Conference after the Greco-Turkish War. He
acted as second delegate of the Ottoman Empire at the Conference at Rome
against the Anarchists, and also at the Peace Conference at The Hague.

At this latter Conference he won golden opinions from all the delegates
of the other Powers for his politeness, his charm of manner, and the
clever tact with which he performed his somewhat difficult mission.

Few, if any, of the dignitaries of Constantinople possess such a wide
knowledge of Europe, European ways, and European politics. Enjoying the
full confidence of the Sultan and of the Sublime Porte, he is recognised
by the foreign missions as the working head of the Department of Foreign
Affairs. He is the right hand of his chief, Tewfik Pasha, whom he aids
with all his intelligence in the incessant difficulties which beset
Turkish diplomacy. As a mark of their esteem he has been decorated by
nearly every sovereign in Europe, while the Sultan has given him the
plaque in brilliants of the Orders of Osmanie and the Medjidie.

Noury Pasha being well known to me as one of the cleverest men in
Turkey, it afforded me great pleasure to obtain a chat with him one
evening in the quiet of his own home.

He received me in a cosy room on the ground floor, a room that was more
European than Turkish, and where I noticed many signed photographs of
the chief diplomatists of Europe who are his friends.

When we were seated, a man-servant brought us the inevitable tiny cup of
excellent coffee, and delicious cigarettes, and then we fell to
chatting.

I gave him a message from a notable foreign ambassador who was our
mutual friend, and told him the reason I was in Constantinople.

“Ah! So you wish to see His Majesty, and also His Excellency Tewfik
Pasha! Well, I will see what can be done,” was his reply.

“But I want your Excellency to tell me, if you will, what is the present
situation in Turkey, and what are her future aspirations?” I said
boldly.

The question was rather a poser. He hesitated. I pressed him to tell me
the truth as far as he was able, without being injudicious; and at last,
after some reluctance, he consented.

“You Europeans,” he laughed, “are under a great misconception as regards
Turkey. My sovereign, His Imperial Majesty, is often portrayed as a
bloodthirsty brute, who has no regard for human life, and whose reign is
one of terror and terrible injustice. Now the exact opposite is the
truth. You will meet His Majesty, and judge for yourself. I have good
opportunities of seeing how deeply he has the welfare of his people at
heart. Is it not he, for instance, who out of his own pocket supports
some six hundred schools in Turkey? It is he, personally, who has more
than once prevented a declaration of war. I know we Turks have many
defects. But what nation has not? Even you English are not—well, exactly
perfect,” he laughed. “Foreigners come here to Constantinople and hold
up their hands that we do not sweep our streets, as is done in other
capitals. The fact is, Turkey is not a rich country, and we have no
money to expend on scavengers. I and every Turk would only welcome
cleanliness. But how can we do it when we have no funds? Again, the very
people who criticise us, the foreigners, can come and live here for
twenty years and not pay one piastre of municipal tax. Can they do that
in any other country?”

I admitted that they could not.

“Then why should they criticise us? All we want to be allowed to do is
to carry on our government in our own way. Our population is of
different race and different creed from Europeans, and therefore
necessitates a totally different method of government. England does not
understand Turkey, or Turkish methods. I readily grant that our
government would not suit England, but neither would British ideas be
tolerated here. For many years all the diplomatic correspondence of the
Sublime Porte has passed through my hands, hence I know what I am
speaking about when on the topic of Turkish diplomacy. Abroad, we are
told that our word is not our bond, that we give promises that we do not
fulfil, and that we are a century or so behind the times. Well, I admit
that we are not a twentieth-century nation. I admit that our Sublime
Porte is not so imposing as your Foreign Office in Whitehall, or the
Ministère des Affaires Étrangères in Paris, or in Vienna. But I do
maintain that the government of my sovereign, the Sultan, is a
beneficent one for Turkey, and that our foreign policy has for its base
the peace and welfare of the Balkans.”

“But Macedonia?” I remarked.

He shrugged his shoulders.

“The question of Macedonia is, I admit, an extremely difficult one,” he
answered. “We have to govern a population so varied, both in nationality
and in creed, that there must of necessity be constant aggressions and
outbreaks. It is said that we aid and abet the Greek bands in massacring
the Christians. I totally deny this. We do not. Surely it is to our own
interest to maintain peace and order in Macedonia, and not to allow
outsiders to create disorder and dissension!”

“And the protests of Bulgaria?”

His Excellency smiled.

“We hear from time to time threats of war,” was his answer. “But when we
hear them, we remember that we are sixteen million Turks; and when we
sleep, we sleep quite undisturbed by any war rumours from Sofia.”

“Then you do not anticipate armed reprisals from Bulgaria?”

He laughed, but said nothing except—

“Turkey is well informed, I assure you, of all that transpires in
Sofia.”

Noury Pasha’s son, a smart lad of sixteen, entered and chatted with us
in French. He is going to Paris for his education, and is destined for
the Turkish Diplomatic Service. He is a bright, intelligent youth, who,
like his father, is imbued with Western ideas, and yet is naturally full
of patriotism for his own country.

Another cup of excellent coffee, another cigarette over a chat upon
private matters, and I took leave of my host—after I had begged the
photograph which appears in these pages—feeling that I had met one of
the most charming and most intelligent men in the great Ottoman Empire.

Next day I called at the palace of Tewfik Pasha, and on being ushered
into a gorgeous reception-room—very French, but by the way lit by
candles in high glass chimneys—the usual cup of coffee upon a golden
tray and cigarette were brought me. The secretary of the Greek Embassy
was waiting to see His Excellency upon an urgent matter concerning a
massacre by a Greek band in Macedonia which had taken place near Seres
the day previously. This meant, I saw, a long interview, and not caring
to wait, I left a message for His Excellency to the effect that I would
call and see him at the Sublime Porte on the following morning.

Next to His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, Tewfik Pasha is certainly the
most powerful man in the Ottoman Empire. A quiet-mannered, quiet-spoken,
grey-bearded gentleman with kindly eyes and a fatherly manner, he is
entirely the opposite that one would expect of “the terrible Turk.” Born
in Constantinople in 1845, the son of a General of Division, Ismail
Hakki Pasha, he was destined for the army, and prosecuted his studies
with great diligence. Unfortunately, owing to feeble health, he was
compelled to abandon the idea of a military career—not, however, before
he had passed his examination and obtained his diploma. He then chose a
new career, one in which he has certainly rendered his country signal
services. In 1866 he joined the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as attaché,
six years later being nominated as second secretary at the Ottoman
Legation at Rome, whence he went to Vienna, to Berlin, and, later on, to
Athens. He was transferred to St. Petersburg as first secretary at the
moment when there arose those grave complications which resulted in the
war between Russia and Turkey. Then, during the war, he was appointed
diplomatic agent to the Turkish Commander-in-Chief. In 1879, after the
war, he was sent back to the Russian capital, but on this occasion in
the capacity of Minister Plenipotentiary.

At the early age of forty-one Tewfik Pasha found himself Ambassador at
Berlin, a post which he occupied for ten years, namely, till 1895. His
personal charm, his uprightness, and his frankness of manner endeared
him to his colleagues in the German capital, as well as to the German
Court, and it was he, indeed, who laid the foundation of the present
cordial friendliness between the sovereigns at Berlin and
Constantinople.

Finally, in 1895, the Sultan recalled him to Turkey and promoted him to
be Minister of Foreign Affairs, a powerful position which he still
holds. For the past eleven years he has directed the destinies of the
Ottoman Empire with broad-mindedness, tact, and patience, that have,
without doubt, been highly beneficial to his country’s interests. His
post is no sinecure, as recent history has shown us. Yet he is a
conscientious man of Western ideas and Western views; one of the
cleverest diplomatists in the whole of Europe, and yet at the same time
just and honourable in his dealings. However much we in England may
criticise the policy of the Sublime Porte, we can have only admiration
for Tewfik Pasha, both as a man and as the faithful servant of his
Imperial master.

In Turkey fresh diplomatic difficulties arise every minute, yet with
Noury Pasha’s assistance he grapples with them and deals with them in a
manner which the diplomatists of few other nations could ever hope to
do. Honoured by the most complete confidence of his sovereign, who
possesses for him a particular esteem, Tewfik Pasha is universally known
and liked. The diplomatic corps in Constantinople are ever loud in their
praises of his extreme kindness and courtesy and his readiness to accede
to all requests that are in reason.

His Excellency’s courtesy towards myself was very marked. Hardly had I
been ushered into his anteroom at the Sublime Porte—a very shabby,
unimposing building of long dreary corridors with broken windows and
broken wooden flooring—when the usual coffee was brought, and I signed
his big visitors’ book. In that book I noticed the signatures of all the
diplomatic world of Constantinople. Then there entered the Russian
Ambassador, who, with a cheery “_Bon jour, m’sieur_,” crossed, and also
signed the book.

A moment later the secretary came, and presenting His Excellency’s
regrets to the Ambassador, pointed out that he already had an
appointment with me, and asked whether he would call later. The
representative of the Tzar said he would call the following morning, and
I was then ushered into Tewfik’s private room, a big, cheerful apartment
with splendid Persian carpets, long windows and a large writing-table at
one end, where sat the grey-bearded Minister in frock-coat and fez. He
rose and greeted me with a hearty hand-shake. With him was seated the
Grand Vizier and Noury Pasha, both of whom also greeted me.

We four had a long and very interesting conversation in French, its
drift, however, being such as would be injudicious to print in these
pages. The chat was of a purely private character, although it closely
concerned the present political situation in the Near East.

“The fact is,” remarked His Excellency presently, smiling as he sat back
in his arm-chair before his littered writing-table, “we Turks are not
understood abroad. Writers in England, and especially your journalists,
not knowing Turkey and never having visited the East, criticise us, and
say all sorts of hard things about Turkish rule and Turkish diplomacy.
They call us intolerant and fanatical. But surely there are evidences in
Constantinople that we are tolerant? We allow Christians to erect
churches wherever they want them; and again, have we not done everything
possible in Macedonia to preserve for its inhabitants their religious
liberty? Really, the English ought to know the truth concerning Turkey.
Unfortunately, the fashion of late seems to be to denounce our land and
all its ways!” And he laughed again.

[Illustration: The entrance to the Bosphorus.]

[Illustration: In Constantinople.]

I referred in guarded words to the possibilities of war with Bulgaria,
whereupon he said—

“We view the matter with perfect tranquillity. The Government of His
Imperial Majesty regrets most deeply those unfortunate incidents in
Macedonia that so constantly occur, but is unable to remedy it. It is
the Greek bands that are to blame—not the Turks.”

“And your diplomatic relations with Bulgaria?” I asked.

“They are perfectly normal,” was his reply. “Dr. Stancioff is an able
Minister, and he fully understands us.”

“Then you do not anticipate hostilities at an early date?” I asked,
pressing home my question.

His Excellency said nothing. He merely shrugged his shoulders. But that
gesture was, to me, sufficiently significant.

“You are going to Macedonia,” he said. “It is not altogether safe, you
know, especially around Presba and Ochrida, or about Seres. But if you
_are_ determined to go, I wish you every good luck on your journey.”

I thanked him, and after another half-hour’s pleasant chat with the
Grand Vizier and Noury Pasha I rose, and Tewfik Pasha grasped my hand
heartily in warm farewell, his parting words being—

“Go, see for yourself, and I believe you will find that we Turks are not
quite so black as we are painted.”

And I left the presence of a man whose broad-minded policy, if it were
adopted in every particular, would, I feel sure, advance the Turkish
cause, and place the Ottoman Empire in a very different position from
what it is to-day.

I crossed the Sea of Marmora to Haidar Pasha, in Asia Minor, visited
Ismid, and saw the new German railway that has its head opposite
Stamboul and is to have its terminus on the Persian Gulf. I went to
Brusa, the ancient capital of the Ottoman Empire, walked in the
wonderful burying-grounds of Scutari, and made many interesting
excursions about Asia Minor, in order to observe the all-powerful
influence of Germany in that country. And I was amazed.

On my return to Constantinople I had other interviews at the Yildiz with
His Majesty himself, and with members of the Government, all of which
combined to show that Turkey is not in any way afraid of Bulgaria. The
fact is, she is uncertain of the attitude of Servia and Roumania, and is
rather mystified as to what Austria will do in the event of war. Relying
upon Germany, and treating Great Britain with studied politeness, she
views the present critical position with perfect coolness and
indifference.

Indeed, as Noury Pasha very justly said one day to me—

“It takes a good deal to arouse us Turks, but when we are aroused, we
fight—and fight to the death.”

Turkey to-day is still in its lethargic state, but once aroused, who
knows where the war will end, or what European complications will
result?

                               MACEDONIA

[Illustration: Lake of Ochrida: Macedonia.]

[Illustration: Lake of Presba: Macedonia.]




                               CHAPTER I
                      PLAIN TRUTHS ABOUT MACEDONIA

War imminent between Bulgaria and Turkey—My secret inquiries—Atrocities
    by the Greek bands—Chats with the leaders of the insurrection—The
    truth about the intrigues in Macedonia—I visit the scene of the
    massacres—Stories told to me—Horrifying facts—Germany behind the
    assassins—A disgraceful truth.


This present record of my observations in the Near East would be
incomplete without some description of my journey through Macedonia, and
what I saw there.

The Macedonian question is the burning question of to-day, and one that
can only be solved in one way—by a fierce and bloody war.

As I have already shown, there is every indication that hostilities
between Bulgaria and Turkey must occur in the present year. Indeed, the
thread is now strained to breaking point, and one need never be
surprised to learn at the breakfast-table one morning that Bulgaria has
boldly thrown down the gauntlet to the Sultan. Then, aided by
Roumania—who will be induced to give her support in return for that
additional strip of territory between the Danube and the Black Sea, as I
have already indicated in a previous chapter—a fierce and bitter
struggle will commence. With Bulgaria, the Northern Albanians will ally
themselves according to the words of the various chiefs of whom I made
inquiry; Montenegro, and of course Servia, will hold their own against
the Turk, and the result must be that the whole of the Balkans will be
aflame.

This forecast is no imaginary one. It is based upon information imparted
to me in confidence by Cabinet Ministers themselves—information which is
in part in the possession of the Foreign Office at this moment. Secret
preparations are in active progress both in Roumania and Bulgaria, while
Servia has ordered her new artillery to be delivered at the end of this
present spring. There is a tacit agreement between the Balkan States
that affairs in Macedonia are intolerable, and that the decimated
population must now be protected. And in summary of the various
conversations I had with the monarchs and their Ministers in each of the
Balkan capitals, I can only say that the view is unanimous.

In Servia, in Bulgaria, in Montenegro, in Albania, in Roumania, and in
Macedonia itself I made every inquiry from reliable sources. From secret
information, I was able to gather that there is but one solution of the
question—WAR.

At present the Bulgarian bands formed to protect the Macedonians are
passive. The organisation is still there, and will be of greatest use
when hostilities are declared; but there is no activity, and there has,
indeed, been little since the recent abortive insurrection.

Greek bands, aided and abetted by the Turks, are, however, everywhere,
and each day the most awful atrocities are committed by them. Reports of
these are received in Sofia and in Constantinople, but no representation
is made by either of the Powers to the Sublime Porte or to Athens.
“Macedonia!” exclaimed a well-known foreign Ambassador one day, while I
was sitting at lunch with him at his Embassy, “Macedonia! We’re sick of
Macedonia, and have ceased to trouble about it!”

Ceased to trouble indeed! Here a great and intelligent Christian
population is being slaughtered in order to further the ambitious aims
of Germany, and no one stirs a finger! Europe raised its eyes heavenward
when it heard of the Congo atrocities, yet of poor Macedonia the Powers
are “sick,” and she is cast helpless to the assassin’s knife!

Before going to Macedonia I sought and obtained the opinions of the
leading authorities in the East, as well as those of the rulers and
Ministers. Much told me by the various monarchs was, of course, in
entire confidence, therefore I can only speak generally in declaring
their opinion to be in favour of securing for Macedonia autonomy under a
European prince as Governor-General.

In more than one high quarter Prince Danilo of Montenegro was mentioned
as possible for the post, and in another the name of Prince Mirko of
Montenegro was put forward. A German prince or an Austrian archduke
would be impossible, but an English prince would be welcomed, and the
name of Prince Arthur of Connaught was spoken of by more than one Balkan
Cabinet Minister.

In Servia I had several highly interesting chats with Professor Civics
of Belgrade University, who is a well-known authority on Macedonia, and
who has recently published a book attempting to prove that the bulk of
the Macedonian population is not Bulgar, but Serb. Many of his arguments
I found, on exhaustive inquiry, to be well based, yet my own conclusion
is that, after all, the great majority of the Macedonian population is
really Bulgar.

This fact is admitted all through the Balkans, therefore the situation
in Macedonia must of necessity affect Bulgaria more closely than any
other nation.

The question of Macedonia is a most difficult and complicated one, but I
spared no effort in order to thoroughly master it in all its various
phases, and to get at the truth of the present and the probabilities of
the near future.

In Sofia I had a long talk with Professor Agoura of Sofia University,
who is one of the best-known authorities upon the Macedonian question.
He has been in Macedonia many times, and, like myself, has had an
opportunity of speaking with the people and hearing their grievances.

“In England the Macedonian question is entirely misunderstood,” he said.
“Some writers have taken Professor Civics’ views, and endeavoured to
prove that the Macedonians are really Slavs. But they are not. Their
whole history shows that they are Bulgars.”

“And the present state of the country?” I asked.

“Never in the modern history of Macedonia has it been in such a bad
state as at present. The Christian Bulgars are outraged, tortured, and
shot, and their villages burnt by the Greek bands, who are now under the
protection of the Turks, and not a voice is raised at Constantinople in
complaint. It is simply astounding that such a state of things should be
allowed to exist in this twentieth century. Over one thousand Christian
Bulgars were killed in the raids last year, and this year the number is
known to be more than double. Bulgaria is, however, at this moment
staying her hand. Weakened as the Macedonians are, and with Turkey
protecting the Greek bands, our Bulgarian bands for the protection of
the villages have but little chance. Of late, it has been the
unfortunate Bulgar who has lost always. The Bulgar bands, it was found,
compromised the villages, and at the same time were not strong enough to
protect them. Therefore those still in Macedonia live in the mountains
and come down when required. Ah!” he added, throwing up his hands, “the
state of affairs is terrible! Only recently during a village wedding at
Zagoutcheni the place was attacked by a Greek band and seventy men,
women, and children killed.”

“And in your opinion what would be the best settlement of the question?”
I inquired; for he was one of the greatest authorities in Europe upon
the much-vexed problem.

“The best settlement of Macedonia would be an autonomy, but a restrained
one—one that would not separate Macedonia from Turkey,” he replied.
“Macedonia should be placed under a European Governor-General—certainly
not German—preferably a Swiss. The police and the central administration
should be vested in the Governor-General, and all other questions left
to Turkey. Religion should, of course, be free. Bulgaria has no desire
to annex Macedonia, as the Powers seem to think. I do not think that the
question can be settled in any other way. A European conference should
be convoked, and the matter dealt with at once. When you go to
Macedonia, you will see for yourself the state of things. But remember,
the Turks will let you see nothing if they can help it. You are going to
Monastir. Good. Travel across to Ochrida, and you will see and hear
things that will appal you.

[Illustration:

  Macedonian Christian abducted by the Turks from Klene, a village near
    Debr, and rescued by a Bulgarian band.
]

[Illustration:

  GENERAL TZONTCHEFF,
  The Bulgarian leader in Macedonia.
]

“Recently there have been, to my knowledge, eight Christian villages
entirely destroyed by Greek bands—the inhabitants exterminated, and the
houses burned to the ground. During the past two years there has never
passed one single day without murders and outrages committed by Greek
bands upon the Bulgar inhabitants of Macedonia. Unfortunately, the
Turkish army arrives always too late to protect the population; but this
is, of course, arranged: Indeed, it seems as though the Turks protect
these Greek bands and assist them in their nefarious work. From Ochrida
right down to Salonica these murders are of daily occurrence, always by
the Greek bands. These bands operate in the arrondissements of Seres,
Drama, Demir-Hissar, Kavala; in the Salonica _vilayet_ at Enije-Vardar,
Vodena, and Guevgueli; in Lerin, Florina, Castoria, Presba, and Murievo,
and around Monastir. The Servian bands operate at Cumanovo, Palanca,
Veles, Kitschevo, and Poretschi; while Turkish bands are just now
massacring at Tikveschi, Schlip, Veles, Kotschani, Strousaitza, Razlog,
Melnik, and Nevrokop. So it will be seen that where there are no Greek
bands, there are either Turks or Servians.”

In Sofia I also met the renowned leader of the premature insurrection in
Macedonia, General Ivan Tzontcheff, a short, smart, dapper little man,
quick of movement and alert of manner. With him I likewise had a very
interesting chat. As one who has the Macedonian cause at heart, as head
of the Macedonian External Committee, and being in daily touch with
events in that terrified country, he and his friend, Monsieur
Gologanoff, were able to give me many details and explain much that is
unknown to the English public.

I also met several times, and had long conversations with, Dr.
Tartarcheff, who was president of the Macedonian Revolutionary Committee
in Bulgaria, and who, after the insurrection, was taken prisoner by the
Turks. Both men gave me much authentic information and introductions
that were of great use to me in my journey through Macedonia.

The truth is that the Macedonian question is the direct result of the
Treaty of Berlin, for by it the Treaty of St. Stefano—which incorporated
Macedonia in the Bulgarian Principality—was annulled. The Treaty of
Berlin thus left Macedonia under the Turkish dominion, with a provision
of a kind of autonomy under the control of the Great Powers.

This autonomy was worked up in detail by an International Commission in
Constantinople in 1880. But it was not applied, and the situation in
Macedonia remained the same as it was before the Russo-Turkish War, and
became even worse, on account of the Turkish fanaticism aroused against
the Bulgarians as the cause of their military disasters.

The Turkish persecutions and the new situation in Bulgaria attracted the
greater portion of the Macedonian intelligent population into that
Principality. A strong Macedonian emigration was therefore started to
Bulgaria, which in late years has arisen to the number of more than
150,000.

Macedonia, thus drained of its intelligence, devoted its energies from
1880 to 1890 to a strong educational movement, which was favoured in a
great measure by the political circumstances arisen after the union of
Eastern Roumelia to the Bulgarian Principality in 1885. Towards the end
of this period, 1880 to 1890, there had sprung up in Macedonia a young,
vigorous intelligence, with a strong national conscience, longing for
greater freedom in the national and economical development of the
country, and aspiring for a wider field of activity. The Turks, afraid
of the Bulgarian progress, began to restrain the activity of the
Macedonians. The growing tyrannical régime of the Sultan Hamid made the
situation still more difficult, and life became impossible in the
country.

The Macedonians then sought their salvation in revolution.

This revolutionary movement had for its object the autonomy of
Macedonia, which is declared by all I met in the Balkans to be the only
solution of the question.

Several important reasons are given for this. First, it is argued that
autonomy was secured by International Acts:—the Treaty of Berlin, and
the International Commission in Constantinople, 1880. Secondly, it did
not touch in any way the integrity of the Turkish Empire, a dogma in the
policy of the European Powers. Thirdly, it did not in any way impair the
suzerainty of the Sultan, who still remained the sovereign of the
province, and who had himself accepted and signed the International Act.
Fourthly, it gave full scope to the free development of all the
inhabitants in the country, independently of religion or race. Fifthly,
the autonomy not only did not affect the interests of any Balkan State,
but was bringing a soothing element into the relations between the
Balkan nations.

To-day the animosities between the Balkan nations have their common
cause in Macedonia. She is the apple of discord. Every Balkan State is
contemplating the conquest of this rich province and the playing of
principal rôle in the destinies of the Peninsula. All have instituted
church and school propagandas in the country, where they wage a furious
war between themselves upon the shoulders of the native population. This
war is made more cruel by the policy of Turkey, Germany, and Greece. So
that in this way the Macedonian population is demoralised, and the
Balkan nations themselves are exhausting their energy.

The autonomy, if secured, would exercise a benign influence towards an
understanding between the Balkan nations. By the establishment of such
an administration in Macedonia, under the guidance and the control of
Europe, the Macedonians would take their destiny in their own hands. The
different propagandas would not have such a propitious field for action,
and the animosities would gradually subside. That this is the best
solution of the Macedonian question is held by statesmen all through the
Peninsula, for by the progress of time and the development of events the
erection of Macedonia into a separate state must become dominant as the
final solution.

The way for a Balkan Federation would then be cleared. Macedonia by
itself would become a kind of Switzerland, and the nucleus towards the
creation of a still more powerful Switzerland in the Balkan Federation,
which, neutralised, would create in the Balkan Peninsula a field for
progress and civilisation, but not a bridge for the conquering ambitions
from the North.

With such broad ideas and with such hopes, the Macedonians wrote upon
their revolutionary banner the watchwords, “_Macedonia for the
Macedonians_.”

The revolutionary movement in Macedonia—which dates from the year
1893—began to develop into a strong organisation from 1896-97. The whole
country, by patient work, was gradually covered with a network of secret
societies, at the head of which was a Central Revolutionary Committee,
which, in fact, had a greater power in the country than the official
Turkish authorities.

This revolutionary organisation had an international character. In it
were received all the Macedonians thirsting for liberty. In its ranks
were not only Bulgarians, but also Vlachs, Montenegrins, Servians, and
even Turks, discontented with the Sultan’s régime. But on the whole, the
organisation bore a Bulgarian colour, chiefly on account of the great
Bulgarian majority in Macedonia, and also on account of the suspicion
that the organisation intended prosecuting Bulgarian ambitions.

For the reason that Macedonia had a population mostly of Bulgarian
nationality, and through the agitation of Macedonian Emigration, the
revolutionary movement found a favourable ground in Bulgaria. Here it
was met with sympathy, which was followed by moral and material support.
An organisation was instituted in the Principality, which spread its
influence very rapidly through the whole country. This organisation was
called the External Organisation, while that in Macedonia bore the name
of the Internal Revolutionary Organisation.

The activity of these two organisations brought the revolutionary
movement to a great development during the years of 1900 and 1901. The
revolutionary idea became dominant in Macedonia. Nearly the whole
population was united in a strongly organised body, and a great part of
the men able to fight were armed, and fighting bands were formed which
exercised the armed men. The country was divided into military
districts, and the Macedonians were inspired with such enthusiasm that
they welcomed, with a thrill of exultation, the impending struggle. The
enthusiasm was no less great in Bulgaria, where the coming insurrection
was awaited with great hopes of success. Indeed, no nation in the Balkan
Peninsula had shown such a power of organisation, such sacrificing
spirit, and such fighting qualities as the Macedonians. An intimate
knowledge of the Macedonian revolutionary movement, such as General
Tzontcheff possesses, shows, indeed, the wonderful energy of the
Macedonians.

[Illustration: A Bulgarian Band in Macedonia.]

But alas! political intrigues from quarters with unfriendly dispositions
towards Macedonian aspirations, sowed misunderstandings in the midst of
the Organisation, and her forces were suddenly paralysed by internal
strife just on the eve of the struggle.

The consequence was that the Macedonian revolutionary movement did not
express itself in one general effort, but in partial insurrections, none
of which showed the whole revolutionary energy. The insurrection in the
valley of the river Stromina during the autumn of 1902 and the
insurrection in the _vilayet_ of Monastir in 1903 were easily crushed,
and the hopes and expectations of the population unfortunately deceived.

After these abortive insurrections a new situation was created. The
European Powers admitted the inability of the Turkish Government to
establish order in Macedonia, and the principle of European interference
and control was adopted. As a result of this principle, the Murshteg
reforms worked up by Austria and Russia were proclaimed. These reforms,
however, were not integral, but merely embryo reforms, from the
expansion and development of which depended the pacification of the
country.

On the other hand, the morale of the Macedonians was now shaken and the
power of the Revolutionary Organisation shattered in consequence of the
incomplete insurrections and the consequent Turkish victories.

Naturally, the Turks, faithful to their traditional policy, would avail
themselves of this situation in order to hinder the development of the
reforms in their true sense. The Greeks—whose policy is the partition of
Macedonia—were, like the Turks, against such a development of the
reforms, because the establishment of an effectual European control
would lead to a good government, which would gradually evolve the
destiny of Macedonia towards an autonomy.

Therefore, the policy of Turkey, Greece, and Germany had a common
interest, namely, to paralyse the reforms, and became a common enemy to
the Macedonians, who, by their Bulgarian majority, were striving for
autonomy.

So, united in their action, Greece, and also Servia to a smaller extent,
hurled, the one from the South and the other from the North, armed bands
into Macedonia, who commenced their destructive work against the
Bulgarian element, by killing the leading men and enforcing the country
population to recognise Greek or Servian nationality. The Turks cover
their action, and the villagers, unprotected and without arms, are
unable to defend themselves. They are at the mercy of these bands, aided
by the Turkish authorities.

Thus a cruel religious and racial war has sprung up in the heart of
Macedonia, under the protection and instigation of the Turkish policy,
and also under the benevolent eyes of Germany and Austria.

This terrible situation has been still more complicated by the
Bulgarians themselves. The Revolutionary Organisation being shattered in
its moral and material power, armed bands were formed after the
insurrection, under unscrupulous leaders, who commenced acts of
depredation upon the unfortunate Macedonians.

Just now the revolutionary organisation in Bulgaria is undergoing
another crisis. It is divided into two principal flanks: the moderate
and the extreme. The first-mentioned inclines towards a suspension of
active revolutionary operations on account of the exhaustion of the
Macedonian population and the unfavourable political situation in
Europe, while the extreme party are urging a continuance of
revolutionary action to exasperation. At the annual congress in January
last the moderates had a chance to oust the extreme party, but the death
of Damian Groueff, the chief of the moderates, who was killed in the
village of Roussinovo (_vilayet_ of Uskub) upset all their plans. On
account of Groueff’s death they did not take part in the congress, and
the result is that the extreme party are now all paramount, and further
reprisals may be expected.

Therefore from all sides—from Turks, Greeks, Servians, and even
Bulgarians, as well as from an interested diplomacy—the Macedonians are
pressed, and their aspirations for the autonomy compromised. And what is
the result of all this? Only that the Macedonians are set by the
interested Powers before the eyes of the Christian world as a cruel and
barbarous population, unworthy of sympathy—worthy only of the tyrannical
Turkish rule!

What is the remedy?

There is but one, the one advocated by the kings and princes of the
Balkans and the Cabinet Ministers with whom I chatted, namely, to change
the present farcical so-called reforms into an administration, under
effectual European control by appointing a European Governor-General,
responsible to the Powers. Then this terrible situation will change into
the peaceful development of a country which is endowed by nature with
bounty, but reduced by men’s covetousness to a perfect hell.

That Macedonia to-day is a hell I have seen with my own eyes. And
moreover I have been under fire from a Greek band myself. I
travelled—contrary to the advice of my friends, who feared the perils of
the way—right through the heart of Macedonia from south to north,
visiting the Seres and Melnik districts, which only a few days prior to
my arrival had been ravaged by Greek bands. In one poor village I passed
through, twenty-three women, children, and old men had been butchered in
cold blood on the previous day, and I saw with my own eyes some of their
mutilated bodies. Upon the women nameless atrocities had been committed.

In Caraja-Kioi, a village not far from Seres, I was told that a
fortnight before, nineteen persons, mostly old men and women, had been
massacred, and I was informed by eye-witnesses that the Greek band was
assisted by the Turks, and that present at the massacre was a Greek
metropolitan and a Greek consular employé!

I saw and spoke to two women who had been maltreated by the Greeks, and
who still bore wounds. The head of one was bound by a bloodstained rag,
and the arm of the other was in a sling.

What they told me was truly horrifying. Both had been outraged and left
for dead, without a hand being raised in their defence. And their cases
were only two out of several dozen. A child, a little girl of seven, had
been decapitated by a brutal Turk, and a mother with her suckling babe
had been tortured by slow burning.

Everywhere I went was the same terrible tale, the same cry for the
protection of the Powers. At Vranja, in the Melnik district, I saw the
gaunt ruins of seven houses which had been recently burnt, and was told
how nine women, after being subjected to all sorts of atrocities, were
afterwards shot, while at Bashna three men were burnt alive, in a house,
and six women shot.

That journey through Macedonia still haunts me like a nightmare. On the
one hand, I met the oily Turkish official in frock-coat and fez
declaring that the country was quite quiet, and that all reports were
exaggerated; while, on the other, I saw with my own eyes the devilish
blood-lust of the Greeks, the poor people with their wounds still upon
them, the mutilated bodies of innocent Christian women whose blood calls
hourly for vengeance.

To Florina, up to Kastoria, and through the terrorised districts around
the lakes of Presba and Ochrida I travelled, first under Turkish escort,
but not being allowed to see what I wanted, I was permitted by a
Bulgarian band to join them, and rode through the various districts. It
was a somewhat perilous and exciting time, for I travelled quickly,
wishing to get out of the country. Its terrors had got on my nerves, and
the gloomy warnings of my friends ever rose within my mind. Greek bands
seemed to be operating everywhere, and we never knew when we might not
come into close quarters. Our way lay often through deep ravines,
affording excellent cover for lurking Greeks.

So life was the reverse of pleasant.

Still I saw with my own eyes sights that appalled me, and I am certain
that if the reader had seen what I have witnessed he would cry shame
that such an awful state of things should be allowed to exist, and even
fostered by a Christian civilised Power.

Does the Christian Kaiser, with all his outward declarations of belief
in the direction of the Almighty, ever give a thought to the poor
Macedonians butchered with his knowledge—butchered to further the secret
aims of the “Fatherland”? Does His Imperial Majesty, when he bends his
knee in prayer, remember the first tenets of the Christian faith?

Those who know, as I know, the secrets of German intrigue in
Constantinople, cannot but feel contempt and disgust at the shameful
sacrifice of human life in Macedonia, where Greeks and Turks outrage,
torture, burn, and shoot the poor innocent populace, egged on by “pious”
Germany.

Let the ambitious Emperor, who so often invokes God’s blessing upon the
German nation, pause for a moment and reflect whether there is no
hypocrisy in his political policy, and whether he himself, personally,
can expect to receive the Divine aid he so constantly petitions with
mock servility.

By raising his hand he could to-morrow stop those brutal, savage Greeks
from their bloody work. Yet, by doing so, he knows he would nullify his
policy of Germany’s advance southward, and would throw to the winds the
years of secret diplomacy practised at the Sublime Porte. Will he do so?

Or will he continue to lift his eyes to Heaven, and close his ears to
the death-cries of the poor slaughtered Christian women and children,
who are every day being butchered for political purposes?

It was the Kaiser’s diplomacy that discovered the existence of the
Roumanian population in Macedonia; it was by his intrigues at Athens
that diplomatic negotiations between Greece and Roumania have been
broken off.

Go to Macedonia yourself with an open mind and study the question on the
spot, and you will, before a week has passed, obtain quite sufficient
evidence to convince you that what I have here written is the truth—that
Germany stands behind both Greek and Turk, and encourages them with
moral and material support to commit those awful and nameless outrages
which are a disgrace to our civilisation.




                               CHAPTER II
                           THE TRUTH EXPOSED

Summary of my confidential information—War this year—The attitude of
    Greece, Bulgaria, Roumania, and Turkey—Procrastination, promises,
    and perfect politeness—A matter more serious than Macedonia—Warning
    to British statesmen and the public—The real truth exposed—Germany
    and India.


As summary of all my confidential inquiries throughout the Near East, I
find that the present position as regards Macedonia is a very serious
one.

Bulgaria, who has the largest population there, has undoubtedly decided
to adopt a firm course, which must inevitably lead to war during the
present year. Within a few months the Balkans will be in bloody
conflict.

Greece is defiant, and her bands still ravage Macedonia. Monsieur
Theotokis, the Prime Minister, has openly adopted a policy of defiance
against Roumania, and of increased persecution of the Vlachs in
Macedonia.

His attitude is a ridiculous one, and calculated to still further
complicate the situation. He declares that the enemies of Hellenism have
succeeded in persuading public opinion in Europe, and even European
Governments, that the abnormal situation in Macedonia is due to the
action of Greco-Macedonian bands, and has also made them forget the
atrocities which Bulgarians had committed for six years against the
Greeks, who had at last been compelled to rise and try to defend
themselves. Whenever the Greek Government asks for compensation of the
Powers, no matter what the question at issue, they are, he says, met
with the argument that they were responsible for the atrocities in
Macedonia, because they aided Greek bands. The Powers, he says, were
informed that the Hellenic Government could not prevent succour being
given to the Macedonian Greeks in their defensive campaign, but would
use its authority to moderate the activity of the bands. Unhappily, the
slackening of the activity of the Greek bands was followed by a
recrudescence of that of the hostile bands. The Powers were informed
that the situation was becoming intolerable, and unless they could take
measures to oblige others to respect their wishes, the Greek Government
would be obliged to defend a race which was resolved to live, and not to
bend under the ferocity of its enemies. He maintains that it is the duty
of Greece to accelerate her military preparations. Without an army she
cannot be considered a factor in the East, or hope for the sympathies of
others.

But M. Theotokis has gone even farther. His declarations are distinctly
amusing. In the course of an interview in Athens in January of the
present year he actually had the audacity to attribute the present
situation in Macedonia to Bulgaria. He argued as follows:—

  “For a period of six years armed bands of Bulgarians roved all over
  Macedonia, endeavouring to get the Greek Christian inhabitants to
  declare allegiance to the head of the Bulgarian Church, and backed up
  their efforts in this direction by committing murders and atrocities
  of every description. Notwithstanding repeated appeals of the Greek
  Government to the Powers to put a stop to these outrages, they were
  continued, and instead of being checked, went on increasing in number
  and violence. News of these atrocities reaching Greece daily, public
  opinion here was getting more and more excited, and finally, the Greek
  public having given up all hope of a stop being put to them,
  committees were formed with the object of taking action to protect
  their compatriots.

  “The Greek Government was powerless to prevent these protective bands
  from crossing into Macedonia, as, unfortunately, we have not
  sufficient forces to thoroughly guard the frontier. The inability is
  not surprising, when you consider that Turkey with twenty times the
  forces at her disposal is not able to prevent them from getting
  across. That these bands should occasionally have seized an
  opportunity to avenge Bulgarian crimes, which had continued so long
  unrestrained, is only natural, as it is not possible to keep armed
  bands under proper control in such circumstances.

  “Finding at last that they had to face Greek bands, which they were
  not able to stand up against, the Bulgarians commenced to fill the
  world with complaints against the Greeks, and sent out descriptions of
  imaginary atrocities committed by Greek bands, when their only real
  cause of complaint was that they themselves could no longer commit
  crimes on the Greek Christians with impunity in the way they, for six
  years, had been accustomed.

  “The result of the great outcry raised by the Bulgarians was that
  strong pressure was brought to bear by the Powers on the Greek
  Government to prevent Greek bands from crossing into Macedonia, and
  the Greek Government increased the efforts they had always been making
  in this direction. Probably as a result of the efforts of this
  Government, fewer Greek bands have been operating in Macedonia during
  the past two months, and the consequence is that thirty-nine Greeks
  have been murdered in Macedonia during this period by Bulgarians,
  while only seven of the latter have been killed by Greeks.

  “The Greek Government have no interest whatever in hindering the
  efforts of the Powers to restore order in Macedonia. Quite the
  contrary; no one desires to see order restored there more than we do.
  But you must remember that the majority of the inhabitants of
  Macedonia are Greeks, and it is not in the power of the Greek
  Government to control public opinion in Greece in face of the
  atrocities committed by Bulgarians on our countrymen in Macedonia. If
  the Bulgarian propaganda in that country is put a stop to, the Greek
  Christians will have nothing to fear, and in such circumstances no
  Greek bands will be found there, as their sole object in crossing the
  frontier was to protect their co-religionists, who for six years had
  been terrorised by the Bulgarians. Once Bulgarian crimes in Macedonia
  cease, there will be nothing more heard of ‘regrettable incidents’ in
  that country.”

Thus it will be seen that the Prime Minister makes no mention of Germany
or of German intrigue. He endeavours to put the blame upon Bulgaria,
when all Europe knows well that it is Greece who is responsible for the
present bloodshed, and even the Turkish Grand Vizier himself has
condemned the action of the Greeks, and declared that in more than one
instance the Greek bands have actually operated with the full knowledge
and assistance of Greek consuls.

With such biassed views held by the Greek Premier, it can easily be seen
that a solution of the problem of Macedonia cannot be arrived at without
recourse to force of arms, and the more so, because of Bulgaria’s
determination to make her power felt in the country where her subjects
are being daily murdered.

The Turkish policy is the traditional one of procrastination, promises,
and perfect politeness. The promised reforms are not carried out, the
foreign officers employed in reforming the gendarmerie are disgusted
with their treatment, and are fast leaving the Turkish service, while
the Mohammedan rule is daily growing more and more oppressive, and the
unfortunate Macedonians are being slaughtered under the very eyes and
with the full cognisance of the Turkish officials, both civil and
military.

In Constantinople it is believed that a serious _entente_ regarding
Macedonia exists between Italy and Austria, and this belief is based
upon Signor Tittoni’s recent declaration. From information I gathered
from very reliable sources, however, I am in a position to state that
the Turkish fears are utterly groundless. An _entente_ exists, but only
in regard to Servia, Bulgaria, and Northern Albania. Austria desired
that Montenegro should be included, but Italy—for very obvious
reasons—made the complete independence of that valiant little country
one of the stipulations. Hitherto Italy and Austria have carried on
separate propagandas, but it is quite certain that the two are now
amalgamated, and will in future work towards one common end.

Turkey has nothing to fear from either Austria or Italy, but from
Bulgaria and Germany—from the former, who will assert her rights; and
from the latter, who will eventually play the traitor and crush her.

My conversations at the Sublime Porte, in those shabbily furnished
rooms, with seedy officials offering me cups of coffee, were often very
amusing. I had really credited the Turk with more shrewdness, for the
Oriental is usually supposed to be the finest diplomat in all the world.
Yet from the Grand Vizier downwards to the men-in-the-street, they are
all held fascinated under the benign smile of Germany.

Assurances were given me during those audiences with the rulers of
Turkey that all was being done that could possibly be done in Macedonia;
that reports of massacres were exaggerated; that the Turks were actually
protecting the Bulgarians, and that the Macedonian question was not at
all a serious one.

I will give one instance. It was admitted to me during one of my
audiences at the Sublime Porte, that “a few incidents” had occurred, but
I was assured that they were not serious, and that all was now quiet in
Macedonia.

In reply, I pointed out that on November 7 last (Old Style) a Greek band
descended upon the village of Karadjovo, and having disembowelled seven
men, killed twenty-five Bulgarians. They then massacred most of the
women and children in the village, and calmly went off.

I was then officially informed that it had been discovered that a
certain Greek consul had been implicated in this raid, and that arms had
been supplied through him. The Turks had therefore made a strong protest
to Athens, and sent four battalions in pursuit of the assassins.

At Salonica, ten days later, I saw one of the peasants present at this
massacre in question, and the description he gave of it was horrifying.
His version of the affair was very different from the official Turkish
version, for he declared that the Turks themselves aided the assassins
and allowed them to get clear away. Twenty-five women were, he said,
outraged and afterwards killed. One woman had her hands cut off, and
another’s feet were burnt over a fire. Other facts he told me were too
terrible to repeat here.

Though the Porte may have made formal protest to Athens, there is but
little doubt that the Turks were implicated in the massacre—as they are
in most of those “regrettable incidents,” as they are called, which
daily occur in the Land of Black Terror.

Permission was readily granted to me to travel through the country, but
it certainly would not have been had it been known that beyond the lake
of Ochrida I intended to disregard my Turkish escort and throw in my lot
with the Bulgarians, declared by the authorities to be “insurgents” in
order to see for myself.

I arrived at the village of Ghilposte, in the Seres district, two days
after a Greek band had descended upon the little place, and I saw with
my own eyes traces of their terrible atrocities. They had blown up ten
houses by dynamite, and capturing four men, two women, and a baby one
year old, had deliberately burned them all alive, as well as outraging
three other women.

The leader of the Bulgarian organisation for the protection of the
defenceless people furnished me with a complete list of all the
atrocities committed by the Greek bands during the past year, but it is
so long and the details are so revolting that I do not feel justified in
including it in these pages.

The Turk is indeed a strange product. He hopes always to persuade the
foreigner into adopting his own views. More than once I was told in
Constantinople that there had been _no massacres_ in Macedonia this
year, and that the country, especially in the _vilayet_ of Monastir, was
quite quiet!

[Illustration: GENERAL TZONTCHEFF in Macedonia.]

[Illustration: The Turkish Burial-ground at Scutari, Asia Minor.]

I went there, and discovered the exact opposite to be the case. In
Constantinople also I was strongly persuaded, by interested persons, not
to go to Macedonia; but I went, and I saw things that it was not
intended that I should see.

I had travelled all through the Balkans in order to learn the real
truth, and I did not intend to miss out Macedonia. Turkey, of course,
makes capital out of the fact that the Vlachs, or Roumanian population,
are between the devil and the deep sea. These unfortunate
Macedo-Roumanians live under the cross fire of Greek and Bulgar, each of
whom claims the right to save their souls. The Turks point—and perhaps
justly—to this fact as one of the chief causes of the present disturbed
state of Macedonia. The Turk pretends to be asleep, and to disregard the
intrigues of the other Powers, but the fact is that he is very wide
awake, and knows quite well that hostilities must break out at a very
early date. Only he is misled by Germany, alarmed by a bogey put forward
by Austria and Italy, and a little afraid, at times, of British
protests.

There remains Roumania. Her attitude is a very serious consideration in
discussing the immediate future of the Balkans.

In Bucharest I found that, although a Federation of the Balkan States
would be welcomed, yet one fact is still remembered. In 1888, when the
Bulgarians offered the crown of Bulgaria to King Charles of Roumania, as
the first step towards a Federation, both Russia and Austria opposed it
so strongly that the King was unable to accept. Roumania’s position
towards Macedonia is now one of armed inactivity. Though the
Macedo-Roumanians are slaughtered by the Greek bands, Roumania is
compelled to stay her hand and offer no defence, because alone and
unaided, her protest would be worse than useless.

That she will, ere long, ally herself with Bulgaria against the Turks,
my confidential information goes to show. She desires a better frontier
from the Danube to the Black Sea, and in order to obtain that concession
from Bulgaria she will assist her to drive the Turk from Macedonia.

There is, however, a far more serious consideration, and one which has
been overlooked by British statesmen and the British public.

During my journey of inquiry I made careful investigation into certain
suspicious facts and certain clever intrigues. The inquiry was an
exceedingly difficult one, for the truth is well guarded, for very
obvious reasons.

The result, however, reveals a state of affairs of which we in England
have been unfortunately ignorant, and which, here exposed, should claim
immediate attention by every right-minded and patriotic man.

The truth briefly is this. The recent war between Russia and Japan, the
question of Morocco, the perturbation in Europe by the Russian defeats
and revolution, on the one hand, and the weakness of the Macedonians
made greater by the rivalries between the Balkan nations, on the other,
have of late diverted the attention of Europe from the Near East.

But this is only a lull before the storm—a storm that must break in the
near future, and which surely will have a world-wide significance. The
countries denominated by the general name of the Near East are, by their
geographical position and fertility, of immense importance. They have
been the cradle of the ancient civilisation and of rich and powerful
empires. The shores of the Ægean Sea and of the Eastern Mediterranean
were once the most populated, and their commerce and wealth were
unrivalled. The vast fertile provinces of Asia Minor have been the
granaries of the Roman and Byzantine empires; while the valleys of
Euphrates and Tigris breathed abundance and luxury. History is eloquent
testimony of their past splendour. The reason of their gloomy present
does not lie either in the exhaustion of the soil or in the loss of
their geographical importance, but only in the administration which the
Turk has established for centuries over them. A change in the
administration will bring resurrection. Nay, the means and resources of
the present civilisation must call forth in them an immense economical
development.

Germany, with her usual foresight, has ever been on the alert.

Towards this Near East with gloomy present, but with a glorious future,
the German policy has thrown covetous eyes. When Bismarck made his
famous declaration—_that the Eastern Question was not worth the bones of
a Pomeranian grenadier_—the German policy was already maturing a vast
plan of penetration in the Near East. The real truth is that the basis
of this policy of penetration was the maintenance of the Turkish rule,
as a means for its realisation.

The true extent of German intrigue is not realised in England, therefore
I may as well explain that the policy was—

1. Support, and even encouragement, of the despotical régime in Turkey,
in order to obtain the absolute confidence of Sultan Hamid.

2. Grasp of the reorganisation of the Turkish Army, and use it as her
instrument.

3. Gain a dominant position in the Turkish finances.

4. Lay hold on the communications of the empire, and thus become the
master of her economical development.

A full expansion was given to this policy after the accession to the
throne of William II., who in his first visit to the Sultan in 1889 laid
the foundation of mutual friendship and admiration between the two
rulers.

The results are astonishing. In less than a quarter of a century the
German net has been cast over the whole body of the Turkish Empire.
German diplomacy is paramount to-day in Constantinople. The Turkish Army
has been reorganised upon the Prussian system, and is under German
control. The finances of the Turkish Empire are gradually becoming a
dependency to the German banks by loans and concessions, which are
constantly increasing. By the great railway from the Bosphorus to the
Persian Gulf, opening up by its branches the most fertile provinces of
Asiatic Turkey, Germany becomes master of the economical development of
this part of the Sultan’s empire.

Thus the economical and political influence of the Germans has been so
much extended and has gained such a domination, that the Turkish Empire
is, in a sense, already a German protectorate. No act of importance is
possible in Turkey without the knowledge and influence of Germany. Every
act of Abdul Hamid is under the control and direction of German
diplomacy. _Allemania bisum dostour_ (“Germany is our friend”) is a
saying which has penetrated even into the mass of the Turkish nation,
and the Kaiser has a full right to boast himself as the protector and
champion of the Mussulmans.

In the Balkan Peninsula, on the European side, the pioneer of the German
policy is the Austro-Hungarian Empire. By tradition, by its dynasty, and
by its alliance, Austria plays the rôle of vanguard to the German
advance towards the Near East. The occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made Austria a Balkan power, and her plans are ready for the march
of an Austrian army southward to the Gulf of Salonica, which will bring
her in touch with the Ægean Sea and make her the ruler over the whole
Peninsula. In the meantime, she is strengthening her political and
economical influence in Servia and Albania by the same methods as used
by the Germans.

In the midst of this land activity in the Near East, the importance of
the Ægean Sea, which is the necessary link, was not lost to view. A
footing was sought, and the island of Thassos was chosen as the
foundation-stone of the future naval power in the Eastern basin of the
Mediterranean. This island was picked upon because, in the first place,
it would not attract attention, and, in the second place, because it
would serve admirably the German plans. Thassos has a good geographical
position in the Ægean Sea. It is not far from the Dardanelles, the door
to Constantinople, and is very near the Macedonian shore, being in the
very entrance of the port of Kavala.

With a naval base on this island, Germany would gain a still greater
influence in Turkey, and especially on the European and Asiatic shores
of the Ægean Sea. According to trustworthy information which I have
obtained in confidence, a vast German activity is contemplated upon
these shores in the very near future.

Thus the Germans, with the aid of the Turkish régime and of the Austrian
Empire, are cleverly paving their way towards the Near East, and
preparing the foundation of a “Fatherland” stretching from the Baltic to
the Indian Ocean.

As Germany has already championed the cause of Turkey in Europe, what is
to prevent her from carrying her influence, at an early date, over Egypt
and the whole peninsula of India, where she will find sixty millions of
Mussulmans, who fully recognise that England has abandoned her policy of
bolstering up “the sick man” for many years past? These latter would
welcome Germany as the champion of Mohammedanism, not only in Europe,
but in all the Mussulman states of the Eastern world.

And then?

Surely this is a most important point, which should very seriously
engage the immediate and earnest attention of all British statesmen who
have the true interests of our Empire at heart!

                                THE END.

                              _Printed by_
                        MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED
                              _Edinburgh_

                           Transcriber’s Note

The author employs the name ‘Palagonium Radula’ for the geranium, rather
than the proper ‘Pelargonium Radula’. This appears to be unique to him,
but was retained as printed.

Errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected, and
are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the original.
The following issues should be noted, along with the resolutions.

  156.12   mid[d]le-aged, keen, clever                    Inserted.

  169.20   Chief town, [H/N]egotin                        Replaced.

  170.24   the chief town is Pe[l/t]rovatz                Replaced.

  170.39   in Kra[ni/in]a, East Servia.                   Transposed.

  171.40   PODUN[VA/AV]LYE                                Transposed.

  220.26   the geranium oil (_[Palagonium] Radula_)       _sic_:
                                                          Pelargonium

  226.38   Have you received [i]t?                        Restored.

  280.1    The entrance to the Bosphoro[u]s.              Removed.

  294.31   the exhaustion of the Macedoni[o/a]n           Replaced.
           population

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN OBSERVER IN THE NEAR EAST ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Traveler at Forty, by Theodore Dreiser,
Illustrated by William Glackens


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: A Traveler at Forty


Author: Theodore Dreiser



Release Date: July 5, 2021  [eBook #65765]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TRAVELER AT FORTY***


E-text prepared by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations
      by William Glackens.
      See 65765-h.htm or 65765-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/65765/65765-h/65765-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/65765/65765-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/traveleratforty00drei


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





A TRAVELER AT FORTY


[Illustration: Piccadilly Circus]


A TRAVELER AT FORTY

by

THEODORE DREISER

Author of “Sister Carrie,” “Jennie Gerhardt,”
“The Financier,” etc., etc.

Illustrated by W. Glackens


[Illustration]






New York
The Century Co.
1913

Copyright, 1913, by
the Century Co.

Published, November, 1913




      TO
  “BARFLEUR”




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                          PAGE
        I  BARFLEUR TAKES ME IN HAND                  3
       II  MISS X.                                   16
      III  AT FISHGUARD                              24
       IV  SERVANTS AND POLITENESS                   32
        V  THE RIDE TO LONDON                        37
       VI  THE BARFLEUR FAMILY                       47
      VII  A GLIMPSE OF LONDON                       57
     VIII  A LONDON DRAWING-ROOM                     66
       IX  CALLS                                     72
        X  SOME MORE ABOUT LONDON                    77
       XI  THE THAMES                                89
      XII  MARLOWE                                   95
     XIII  LILLY: A GIRL OF THE STREETS             113
      XIV  LONDON; THE EAST END                     128
       XV  ENTER SIR SCORP                          136
      XVI  A CHRISTMAS CALL                         148
     XVII  SMOKY ENGLAND                            171
    XVIII  SMOKY ENGLAND (_continued_)              180
      XIX  CANTERBURY                               188
       XX  EN ROUTE TO PARIS                        198
      XXI  PARIS!                                   211
     XXII  A MORNING IN PARIS                       225
    XXIII  THREE GUIDES                             238
     XXIV  “THE POISON FLOWER”                      247
      XXV  MONTE CARLO                              255
     XXVI  THE LURE OF GOLD!                        264
    XXVII  WE GO TO EZE                             275
   XXVIII  NICE                                     288
     XXIX  A FIRST GLIMPSE OF ITALY                 295
      XXX  A STOP AT PISA                           306
     XXXI  FIRST IMPRESSIONS OF ROME                315
    XXXII  MRS. Q. AND THE BORGIA FAMILY            327
   XXXIII  THE ART OF SIGNOR TANNI                  337
    XXXIV  AN AUDIENCE AT THE VATICAN               345
     XXXV  THE CITY OF ST. FRANCIS                  354
    XXXVI  PERUGIA                                  365
   XXXVII  THE MAKERS OF FLORENCE                   371
  XXXVIII  A NIGHT RAMBLE IN FLORENCE               380
    XXXIX  FLORENCE OF TO-DAY                       387
       XL  MARIA BASTIDA                            398
      XLI  VENICE                                   409
     XLII  LUCERNE                                  415
    XLIII  ENTERING GERMANY                         424
     XLIV  A MEDIEVAL TOWN                          437
      XLV  MY FATHER’S BIRTHPLACE                   449
     XLVI  THE ARTISTIC TEMPERAMENT                 454
    XLVII  BERLIN                                   462
   XLVIII  THE NIGHT-LIFE OF BERLIN                 474
     XLIX  ON THE WAY TO HOLLAND                    486
        L  AMSTERDAM                                494
       LI  “SPOTLESS TOWN”                          501
      LII  PARIS AGAIN                              507
     LIII  THE VOYAGE HOME                          515




ILLUSTRATIONS


  Piccadilly Circus                                       _Frontispiece_

                                                                  FACING
                                                                   PAGE

  I saw Mr. G. conversing with Miss E.                                 8

  One of those really interesting conversations between
      Barfleur and Miss X.                                            20

  “I like it,” he pronounced. “The note is somber, but
      it is excellent work”                                           70

  Hoped for the day when the issue might be tried out
      physically                                                      74

  Here the Thames was especially delightful                           90

  Barfleur                                                           156

  The French have made much of the Seine                             228

  One of the thousands upon thousands of cafés on the
      boulevards of Paris                                            236

  These places were crowded with a gay and festive throng            244

  I looked to a distant table to see the figure he indicated         252

  “My heavens, how well she keeps up!”                               290

  I sated myself on the house fronts or backs below the
      Ponte Vecchio                                                  384

  There can only be one Venice                                       404

  A German dance hall, Berlin                                        464

  Teutonic bursts of temper                                          482




A TRAVELER AT FORTY




CHAPTER I

BARFLEUR TAKES ME IN HAND


I have just turned forty. I have seen a little something of life. I
have been a newspaper man, editor, magazine contributor, author and,
before these things, several odd kinds of clerk before I found out what
I could do.

Eleven years ago I wrote my first novel, which was issued by a New York
publisher and suppressed by him, Heaven knows why. For, the same year
they suppressed my book because of its alleged immoral tendencies, they
published Zola’s “Fecundity” and “An Englishwoman’s Love Letters.”
I fancy now, after eleven years of wonder, that it was not so much
the supposed immorality, as the book’s straightforward, plain-spoken
discussion of American life in general. We were not used then in
America to calling a spade a spade, particularly in books. We had great
admiration for Tolstoi and Flaubert and Balzac and de Maupassant at a
distance--some of us--and it was quite an honor to have handsome sets
of these men on our shelves, but mostly we had been schooled in the
literature of Dickens, Thackeray, George Eliot, Charles Lamb and that
refined company of English sentimental realists who told us something
about life, but not everything. No doubt all of these great men knew
how shabby a thing this world is--how full of lies, make-believe,
seeming and false pretense it all is, but they had agreed among
themselves, or with the public, or with sentiment generally, not to
talk about that too much. Books were always to be built out of facts
concerning “our better natures.” We were always to be seen as we wish
to be seen. There were villains to be sure--liars, dogs, thieves,
scoundrels--but they were strange creatures, hiding away in dark,
unconventional places and scarcely seen save at night and peradventure;
whereas we, all clean, bright, honest, well-meaning people, were living
in nice homes, going our way honestly and truthfully, going to church,
raising our children believing in a Father, a Son and a Holy Ghost, and
never doing anything wrong at any time save as these miserable liars,
dogs, thieves, et cetera, might suddenly appear and make us. Our books
largely showed us as heroes. If anything happened to our daughters it
was not their fault but the fault of these miserable villains. Most of
us were without original sin. The business of our books, our church,
our laws, our jails, was to keep us so.

I am quite sure that it never occurred to many of us that there was
something really improving in a plain, straightforward understanding of
life. For myself, I accept now no creeds. I do not know what truth is,
what beauty is, what love is, what hope is. I do not believe any one
absolutely and I do not doubt any one absolutely. I think people are
both evil and well-intentioned.

While I was opening my mail one morning I encountered a now memorable
note which was addressed to me at my apartment. It was from an old
literary friend of mine in England who expressed himself as anxious
to see me immediately. I have always liked him. I like him because he
strikes me as amusingly English, decidedly literary and artistic in his
point of view, a man with a wide wisdom, discriminating taste, rare
selection. He wears a monocle in his right eye, à la Chamberlain, and I
like him for that. I like people who take themselves with a grand air,
whether they like me or not--particularly if the grand air is backed up
by a real personality. In this case it is.

Next morning Barfleur took breakfast with me; it was a most interesting
affair. He was late--very. He stalked in, his spats shining, his
monocle glowing with a shrewd, inquisitive eye behind it, his whole
manner genial, self-sufficient, almost dictatorial and always final. He
takes charge so easily, rules so sufficiently, does so essentially well
in all circumstances where he is interested so to do.

“I have decided,” he observed with that managerial air which always
delights me because my soul is not in the least managerial, “that you
will come back to England with me. I have my passage arranged for the
twenty-second. You will come to my house in England; you will stay
there a few days; then I shall take you to London and put you up at a
very good hotel. You will stay there until January first and then we
shall go to the south of France--Nice, the Riviera, Monte Carlo; from
there you will go to Rome, to Paris, where I shall join you,--and then
sometime in the spring or summer, when you have all your notes, you
will return to London or New York and write your impressions and I will
see that they are published!”

“If it can be arranged,” I interpolated.

“It _can_ be arranged,” he replied emphatically. “I will attend to the
financial part and arrange affairs with both an American and an English
publisher.”

Sometimes life is very generous. It walks in and says, “Here! I want
you to do a certain thing,” and it proceeds to arrange all your
affairs for you. I felt curiously at this time as though I was on the
edge of a great change. When one turns forty and faces one’s first
transatlantic voyage, it is a more portentous event than when it comes
at twenty.

       *       *       *       *       *

I shall not soon forget reading in a morning paper on the early ride
downtown the day we sailed, of the suicide of a friend of mine, a
brilliant man. He had fallen on hard lines; his wife had decided to
desert him; he was badly in debt. I knew him well. I had known his
erratic history. Here on this morning when I was sailing for Europe,
quite in the flush of a momentary literary victory, he was lying in
death. It gave me pause. It brought to my mind the Latin phrase,
“_memento mori_.” I saw again, right in the heart of this hour of
brightness, how grim life really is. Fate is kind, or it is not. It
puts you ahead, or it does not. If it does not, nothing can save you. I
acknowledge the Furies. I believe in them. I have heard the disastrous
beating of their wings.

When I reached the ship, it was already a perfect morning in full glow.
The sun was up; a host of gulls were on the wing; an air of delicious
adventure enveloped the great liner’s dock at the foot of Thirteenth
Street.

Did ever a boy thrill over a ship as I over this monster of the seas?

In the first place, even at this early hour it was crowded with people.
From the moment I came on board I was delighted by the eager, restless
movement of the throng. The main deck was like the lobby of one of the
great New York hotels at dinner-time. There was much calling on the
part of a company of dragooned ship-stewards to “keep moving, please,”
and the enthusiasm of farewells and inquiries after this person and
that, were delightful to hear. I stopped awhile in the writing-room
and wrote some notes. I went to my stateroom and found there several
telegrams and letters of farewell. Later still, some books which had
been delivered at the ship, were brought to me. I went back to the
dock and mailed my letters, encountered Barfleur finally and exchanged
greetings, and then perforce soon found myself taken in tow by him, for
he wanted, obviously, to instruct me in all the details of this new
world upon which I was now entering.

At eight-thirty came the call to go ashore. At eight fifty-five I
had my first glimpse of a Miss E., as discreet and charming a bit of
English femininity as one would care to set eyes upon. She was an
English actress of some eminence whom Barfleur was fortunate enough
to know. Shortly afterward a Miss X. was introduced to him and to
Miss E., by a third acquaintance of Miss E.’s, Mr. G.--a very direct,
self-satisfied and aggressive type of Jew. I noticed him strolling
about the deck some time before I saw him conversing with Miss E., and
later, for a moment, with Barfleur. I saw these women only for a moment
at first, but they impressed me at once as rather attractive examples
of the prosperous stage world.

It was nine o’clock--the hour of the ship’s sailing. I went forward to
the prow, and watched the sailors on B deck below me cleaning up the
final details of loading, bolting down the freight hatches covering
the windlass and the like. All the morning I had been particularly
impressed with the cloud of gulls fluttering about the ship, but now
the harbor, the magnificent wall of lower New York, set like a jewel
in a green ring of sea water, took my eye. When should I see it again?
How soon should I be back? I had undertaken this voyage in pell-mell
haste. I had not figured at all on where I was going or what I was
going to do. London--yes, to gather the data for the last third of a
novel; Rome--assuredly, because of all things I wished to see Rome; the
Riviera, say, and Monte Carlo, because the south of France has always
appealed to me; Paris, Berlin--possibly; Holland--surely.

I stood there till the _Mauretania_ fronted her prow outward to the
broad Atlantic. Then I went below and began unpacking, but was not
there long before I was called out by Barfleur.

“Come up with me,” he said.

We went to the boat deck where the towering red smoke-stacks were
belching forth trailing clouds of smoke. I am quite sure that Barfleur,
when he originally made his authoritative command that I come to
England with him, was in no way satisfied that I would. It was a
somewhat light venture on his part, but here I was. And now, having
“let himself in” for this, as he would have phrased it, I could see
that he was intensely interested in what Europe would do to me--and
possibly in what I would do to Europe. We walked up and down as the
boat made her way majestically down the harbor. We parted presently but
shortly he returned to say, “Come and meet Miss E. and Miss X. Miss E.
is reading your last novel. She likes it.”

[Illustration: “I saw Mr. G. conversing with Miss E.”]

I went down, interested to meet these two, for the actress--the
talented, good-looking representative of that peculiarly feminine
world of art--appeals to me very much. I have always thought, since I
have been able to reason about it, that the stage is almost the only
ideal outlet for the artistic temperament of a talented and beautiful
women. Men?--well, I don’t care so much for the men of the stage. I
acknowledge the distinction of such a temperament as that of David
Garrick or Edwin Booth. These were great actors and, by the same
token, they were great artists--wonderful artists. But in the main
the men of the stage are frail shadows of a much more real thing--the
active, constructive man in other lines.

On the contrary, the women of the stage are somehow, by right of mere
womanhood, the art of looks, form, temperament, mobility, peculiarly
suited to this realm of show, color and make-believe. The stage is
fairyland and they are of it. Women--the women of ambition, aspiration,
artistic longings--act, anyhow, all the time. They lie like anything.
They never show their true colors--or very rarely. If you want to know
the truth, you must see through their pretty, petty artistry, back to
the actual conditions behind them, which are conditioning and driving
them. Very few, if any, have a real grasp on what I call life. They
have no understanding of and no love for philosophy. They do not care
for the subtleties of chemistry and physics. Knowledge--book knowledge,
the sciences--well, let the men have that. Your average woman cares
most--almost entirely--for the policies and the abstrusities of her
own little world. Is her life going right? Is she getting along? Is
her skin smooth? Is her face still pretty? Are there any wrinkles? Are
there any gray hairs in sight? What can she do to win one man? How can
she make herself impressive to all men? Are her feet small? Are her
hands pretty? Which are the really nice places in the world to visit?
Do men like this trait in women? or that? What is the latest thing in
dress, in jewelry, in hats, in shoes? How can she keep herself spick
and span? These are all leading questions with her--strong, deep,
vital, painful. Let the men have knowledge, strength, fame, force--that
is their business. The real man, her man, should have some one of these
things if she is really going to love him very much. I am talking
about the semi-artistic woman with ambition. As for her, she clings
to these poetical details and they make her life. Poor little frail
things--fighting with every weapon at their command to buy and maintain
the courtesy of the world. Truly, I pity women. I pity the strongest,
most ambitious woman I ever saw. And, by the same token, I pity the
poor helpless, hopeless drab and drudge without an idea above a potato,
who never had and never will have a look in on anything. I know--and
there is not a beating feminine heart anywhere that will contradict
me--that they are all struggling to buy this superior masculine
strength against which they can lean, to which they can fly in the hour
of terror. It is no answer to my statement, no contradiction of it, to
say that the strongest men crave the sympathy of the tenderest women.
These are complementary facts and my statement is true. I am dealing
with women now, not men. When I come to men I will tell you all about
them!

Our modern stage world gives the ideal outlet for all that is most
worth while in the youth and art of the female sex. It matters not that
it is notably unmoral. You cannot predicate that of any individual case
until afterward. At any rate, to me, and so far as women are concerned,
it is distinguished, brilliant, appropriate, important. I am always
interested in a well recommended woman of the stage.

What did we talk about--Miss E. and I? The stage a little, some
newspapermen and dramatic critics that we had casually known, her
interest in books and the fact that she had posed frequently for those
interesting advertisements which display a beautiful young woman
showing her teeth or holding aloft a cake of soap or a facial cream.
She had done some of this work in the past--and had been well paid for
it because she was beautiful, and she showed me one of her pictures in
a current magazine advertising a set of furs.

I found that Barfleur, my very able patron, was doing everything that
should be done to make the trip comfortable without show or fuss.
Many have this executive or managerial gift. Sometimes I think it is
a natural trait of the English--of their superior classes, anyhow.
They go about colonizing so efficiently, industriously. They make fine
governors and patrons. I have always been told that English direction
and English directors are thorough. Is this true or is it not? At this
writing, I do not know.

Not only were all our chairs on deck here in a row, but our chairs
at table had already been arranged for--four seats at the captain’s
table. It seems that from previous voyages on this ship Barfleur knew
the captain. He also knew the chairman of the company in England. No
doubt he knew the chief steward. Anyhow, he knew the man who sold us
our tickets. He knew the head waiter at the Ritz--he had seen him or
been served by him somewhere in Europe. He knew some of the servitors
of the Knickerbocker of old. Wherever he went, I found he was always
finding somebody whom he knew. I like to get in tow of such a man as
Barfleur and see him plow the seas. I like to see what he thinks is
important. In this case there happens to be a certain intellectual and
spiritual compatibility. He likes some of the things that I like. He
sympathizes with my point of view. Hence, so far at least, we have got
along admirably. I speak for the present only. I would not answer for
my moods or basic change of emotions at any time.

Well, here were the two actresses side by side, both charmingly
arrayed, and with them, in a third chair, the short, stout, red-haired
Mr. G.

I covertly observed the personality of Miss X. Here was some one
who, on sight, at a glance, attracted me far more significantly than
ever Miss E. could. I cannot tell you why, exactly. In a way, Miss
E. appeared, at moments and from certain points of view--delicacy,
refinement, sweetness of mood--the more attractive of the two. But
Miss X., with her chic face, her dainty little chin, her narrow,
lavender-lidded eyes, drew me quite like a magnet. I liked a certain
snap and vigor which shot from her eyes and which I could feel
represented our raw American force. A foreigner will not, I am afraid,
understand exactly what I mean; but there is something about the
American climate, its soil, rain, winds, race spirit, which produces
a raw, direct incisiveness of soul in its children. They are strong,
erect, elated, enthusiastic. They look you in the eye, cut you with a
glance, say what they mean in ten thousand ways without really saying
anything at all. They come upon you fresh like cold water and they
have the luster of a hard, bright jewel and the fragrance of a rich,
red, full-blown rose. Americans are wonderful to me--American men and
American women. They are rarely polished or refined. They know little
of the subtleties of life--its order and procedures. But, oh, the glory
of their spirit, the hope of them, the dreams of them, the desires and
enthusiasm of them. That is what wins me. They give me the sense of
being intensely, enthusiastically, humanly alive.

Miss X. did not tell me anything about herself, save that she was
on the stage in some capacity and that she knew a large number of
newspaper men, critics, actors, et cetera. A chorus girl, I thought;
and then, by the same token, a lady of extreme unconventionality.

I think the average man, however much he may lie and pretend, takes
considerable interest in such women. At the same time there are
large orders and schools of mind, bound by certain variations of
temperament, and schools of thought, which either flee temptation
of this kind, find no temptation in it, or, when confronted, resist
it vigorously. The accepted theory of marriage and monogamy holds
many people absolutely. There are these who would never sin--hold
unsanctioned relations, I mean--with any woman. There are others who
will always be true to one woman. There are those who are fortunate if
they ever win a single woman. We did not talk of these things but it
was early apparent that she was as wise as the serpent in her knowledge
of men and in the practice of all the little allurements of her sex.

Barfleur never ceased instructing me in the intricacies of ship life. I
never saw so comforting and efficient a man.

“Oh”--who can indicate exactly the sound of the English “Oh”--“Oh,
_there_ you are.” (His _are_ always sounded like _ah_.) “Now let
me tell you something. You are to dress for dinner. Ship etiquette
requires it. You are to talk to the captain some--tell him how much
you think of his ship, and so forth; and you are not to neglect the
neighbor to your right at table. Ship etiquette, I believe, demands
that you talk to your neighbor, at least at the captain’s table--that
is the rule, I think. You are to take in Miss X. I am to take in Miss
E.” Was it any wonder that my sea life was well-ordered and that my
lines fell in pleasant places?

After dinner we adjourned to the ship’s drawing-room and there Miss
X. fell to playing cards with Barfleur at first, afterwards with Mr.
G., who came up and found us, thrusting his company upon us perforce.
The man amused me, so typically aggressive, money-centered was he.
However, not he so much as Miss X. and her mental and social attitude,
commanded my attention. Her card playing and her boastful accounts of
adventures at Ostend, Trouville, Nice, Monte Carlo and Aix-les-Bains
indicated plainly the trend of her interests. She was all for the
showy life that was to be found in these places--burning with a desire
to glitter--not shine--in that half world of which she was a smart
atom. Her conversation was at once showy, naïve, sophisticated and yet
unschooled. I could see by Barfleur’s attentions to her, that aside
from her crude Americanisms which ordinarily would have alienated him,
he was interested in her beauty, her taste in dress, her love of a
certain continental café life which encompassed a portion of his own
interests. Both were looking forward to a fresh season of it--Barfleur
with me--Miss X. with some one who was waiting for her in London.

I think I have indicated in one or two places in the preceding pages
that Barfleur, being an Englishman of the artistic and intellectual
classes, with considerable tradition behind him and all the feeling of
the worth-whileness of social order that goes with class training, has
a high respect for the conventions--or rather let me say appearances,
for, though essentially democratic in spirit and loving America--its
raw force--he still clings almost pathetically, I think, to that vast
established order, which is England. It may be producing a dying
condition of race, but still there is something exceedingly fine about
it. Now one of the tenets of English social order is that, being a man
you must be a gentleman, very courteous to the ladies, very observant
of outward forms and appearances, very discreet in your approaches to
the wickedness of the world--but nevertheless you may approach and much
more, if you are cautious enough.

After dinner there was a concert. It was a dreary affair. When it was
over, I started to go to bed but, it being warm and fresh, I stepped
outside. The night was beautiful. There were no fellow passengers
on the promenade. All had retired. The sky was magnificent for
stars--Orion, the Pleiades, the Milky Way, the Big Dipper, the Little
Dipper. I saw one star, off to my right as I stood at the prow under
the bridge, which, owing to the soft, velvety darkness, cast a faint
silvery glow on the water--just a trace. Think of it! One lone,
silvery star over the great dark sea doing this. I stood at the prow
and watched the boat speed on. I threw back my head and drank in the
salt wind. I looked and listened. England, France, Italy, Switzerland,
Germany--these were all coming to me mile by mile. As I stood there a
bell over me struck eight times. Another farther off sounded the same
number. Then a voice at the prow called, “All’s well,” and another
aloft on that little eyrie called the crow’s nest, echoed it. “All’s
well.” The second voice was weak and quavering. Something came up in
my throat--a quick unbidden lump of emotion. Was it an echo of old
journeys and old seas when life was not safe? When Columbus sailed into
the unknown? And now this vast ship, eight hundred and eighty-two feet
long, eighty-eight feet beam, with huge pits of engines and furnaces
and polite, veneered first-cabin decks and passengers!




CHAPTER II

MISS X.


It was ten o’clock the next morning when I arose and looked at my
watch. I thought it might be eight-thirty, or seven. The day was
slightly gray with spray flying. There was a strong wind. The sea
was really a boisterous thing, thrashing and heaving in hills and
hollows. I was thinking of Kipling’s “White Horses” for a while. There
were several things about this great ship which were unique. It was a
beautiful thing all told--its long cherry-wood, paneled halls in the
first-class section, its heavy porcelain baths, its dainty staterooms
fitted with lamps, bureaus, writing-desks, washstands, closets and the
like. I liked the idea of dressing for dinner and seeing everything
quite stately and formal. The little be-buttoned call-boys in their
tight-fitting blue suits amused me. And the bugler who bugled for
dinner! That was a most musical sound he made, trilling in the various
quarters gaily, as much as to say, “This is a very joyous event,
ladies and gentlemen; we are all happy; come, come; it is a delightful
feast.” I saw him one day in the lobby of C deck, his legs spread
far apart, the bugle to his lips, no evidence of the rolling ship in
his erectness, bugling heartily. It was like something out of an old
medieval court or a play. Very nice and worth while.

Absolutely ignorant of this world of the sea, the social, domestic,
culinary and other economies of a great ship like this interested me
from the start. It impressed me no little that all the servants were
English, and that they were, shall I say, polite?--well, if not that,
non-aggressive. American servants--I could write a whole chapter on
that, but we haven’t any servants in America. We don’t know how to
be servants. It isn’t in us; it isn’t nice to be a servant; it isn’t
democratic; and spiritually I don’t blame us. In America, with our turn
for mechanics, we shall have to invent something which will do away
with the need of servants. What it is to be, I haven’t the faintest
idea at present.

Another thing that impressed and irritated me a little was the
stolidity of the English countenance as I encountered it here on this
ship. I didn’t know then whether it was accidental in this case,
or national. There is a certain type of Englishman--the robust,
rosy-cheeked, blue-eyed Saxon--whom I cordially dislike, I think,
speaking temperamentally and artistically. They are too solid, too
rosy, too immobile as to their faces, and altogether too assured and
stary. I don’t like them. They offend me. They thrust a silly race
pride into my face, which isn’t necessary at all and which I always
resent with a race pride of my own. It has even occurred to me at times
that these temperamental race differences could be quickly adjusted
only by an appeal to arms, which is sillier yet. But so goes life. It’s
foolish on both sides, but I mention it for what it is worth.

After lunch, which was also breakfast with me, I went with the
chief engineer through the engine-room. This was a pit eighty feet
deep, forty feet wide and, perhaps, one hundred feet long, filled
with machinery. What a strange world! I know absolutely nothing of
machinery--not a single principle connected with it--and yet I am
intensely interested. These boilers, pipes, funnels, pistons, gages,
registers and bright-faced register boards speak of a vast technique
which to me is tremendously impressive. I know scarcely anything of
the history of mechanics, but I know what boilers and feed-pipes and
escape-pipes are, and how complicated machinery is automatically oiled
and reciprocated, and there my knowledge ends. All that I know about
the rest is what the race knows. There are mechanical and electrical
engineers. They devised the reciprocating engine for vessels and then
the turbine. They have worked out the theory of electrical control and
have installed vast systems with a wonderful economy as to power and
space. This deep pit was like some vast, sad dream of a fevered mind.
It clanked and rattled and hissed and squeaked with almost insane
contrariety! There were narrow, steep, oil-stained stairs, very hot,
or very cold and very slippery, that wound here and there in strange
ways, and if you were not careful there were moving rods and wheels to
strike you. You passed from bridge to bridge under whirling wheels,
over clanking pistons; passed hot containers; passed cold ones. Here
men were standing, blue-jumpered assistants in oil-stained caps and
gloves--thin caps and thick gloves--watching the manœuvers of this
vast network of steel, far from the passenger life of the vessel.
Occasionally they touched something. They were down in the very heart
or the bowels of this thing, away from the sound of the water; away
partially from the heaviest motion of the ship; listening only to the
clank, clank and whir, whir and hiss, hiss all day long. It is a metal
world they live in, a hard, bright metal world. Everything is hard,
everything fixed, everything regular. If they look up, behold a huge,
complicated scaffolding of steel; noise and heat and regularity.

I shouldn’t like that, I think. My soul would grow weary. It would
pall. I like the softness of scenery, the haze, the uncertainty of the
world outside. Life is better than rigidity and fixed motion, I hope. I
trust the universe is not mechanical, but mystically blind. Let’s hope
it’s a vague, uncertain, but divine idea. We know it is beautiful. It
must be so.

The wind-up of this day occurred in the lounging- or reception-room
where, after dinner, we all retired to listen to the music, and then
began one of those really interesting conversations between Barfleur
and Miss X. which sometimes illuminate life and make one see things
differently forever afterward.

It is going to be very hard for me to define just how this could be,
but I might say that I had at the moment considerable intellectual
contempt for the point of view which the conversation represented.
Consider first the American attitude. With us (not the established
rich, but the hopeful, ambitious American who has nothing, comes
from nothing and hopes to be President of the United States or John
D. Rockefeller) the business of life is not living, but achieving.
Roughly speaking, we are willing to go hungry, dirty, to wait in the
cold and fight gamely, if in the end we can achieve one or more of
the seven stars in the human crown of life--social, intellectual,
moral, financial, physical, spiritual or material supremacy. Several
of the forms of supremacy may seem the same, but they are not. Examine
them closely. The average American is not born to place. He does not
know what the English sense of order is. We have not that national
_esprit de corps_ which characterizes the English and the French
perhaps; certainly the Germans. We are loose, uncouth, but, in our way,
wonderful. The spirit of God has once more breathed upon the waters.

Well, the gentleman who was doing the talking in this instance and the
lady who was coinciding, inciting, aiding, abetting, approving and at
times leading and demonstrating, represented two different and yet
allied points of view. Barfleur is distinctly a product of the English
conservative school of thought, a gentleman who wishes sincerely he was
not so conservative. His house is in order. You can feel it. I have
always felt it in relation to him. His standards and ideals are fixed.
He knows what life ought to be--how it ought to be lived. You would
never catch him associating with the rag-tag and bobtail of humanity
with any keen sense of human brotherhood or emotional tenderness of
feeling. They are human beings, of course. They are in the scheme of
things, to be sure. But, let it go at that. One cannot be considering
the state of the underdog at any particular time. Government is
established to do this sort of thing. Statesmen are large, constructive
servants who are supposed to look after all of us. The masses! Let them
behave. Let them accept their state. Let them raise no undue row. And
let us, above all things, have order and peace.

[Illustration: One of those really interesting conversations between
Barfleur and Miss X.]

This is a section of Barfleur--not all, mind you, but a section.

Miss X.--I think I have described her fully enough, but I shall add one
passing thought. A little experience of Europe--considerable of its
show places--had taught her, or convinced her rather, that America did
not know how to live. You will hear much of that fact, I am afraid,
during the rest of these pages, but it is especially important just
here. My lady, prettily gowned, perfectly manicured, going to meet her
lover at London or Fishguard or Liverpool, is absolutely satisfied that
America does not know how to live. She herself has almost learned. She
is most comfortably provided for at present. Anyhow, she has champagne
every night at dinner. Her equipment in the matter of toilet articles
and leather traveling bags is all that it should be. The latter are
colored to suit her complexion and gowns. She is scented, polished,
looked after, and all men pay her attention. She is vain, beautiful,
and she thinks that America is raw, uncouth; that its citizens of whom
she is one, do not know how to live. Quite so. Now we come to the point.

It would be hard to describe this conversation. It began with some
“have you been’s,” I think, and concerned eating-places and modes of
entertainment in London, Paris and Monte Carlo. I gathered by degrees,
that in London, Paris and elsewhere there were a hundred restaurants, a
hundred places to live, each finer than the other. I heard of liberty
of thought and freedom of action and pride of motion which made me
understand that there is a free-masonry which concerns the art of
living, which is shared only by the initiated. There was a world in
which conventions, as to morals, have no place; in which ethics and
religion are tabooed. Art is the point. The joys of this world are sex,
beauty, food, clothing, art. I should say money, of course, but money
is presupposed. You must have it.

“Oh, I went to that place one day and then I was glad enough to get
back to the Ritz at forty francs for my room.” She was talking of her
room by the day, and the food, of course, was extra. The other hotel
had been a little bit quiet or dingy.

I opened my eyes slightly, for I thought Paris was reasonable; but not
so--no more so than New York, I understood, if you did the same things.

“And, oh, the life!” said Miss X. at one point. “Americans don’t know
how to live. They are all engaged in doing something. They are such
beginners. They are only interested in money. They don’t know. I see
them in Paris now and then.” She lifted her hand. “Here in Europe
people understand life better. They know. They know before they begin
how much it will take to do the things that they want to do and they
start out to make that much--not a fortune--just enough to do the
things that they want to do. When they get that they retire and _live_.”

“And what do they do when they live?” I asked. “What do they call
living?”

“Oh, having a nice country-house within a short traveling distance
of London or Paris, and being able to dine at the best restaurants
and visit the best theaters once or twice a week; to go to Paris or
Monte Carlo or Scheveningen or Ostend two or three or four, or as many
times a year as they please; to wear good clothes and to be thoroughly
comfortable.”

“That is not a bad standard,” I said, and then I added, “And what else
do they do?”

“And what else should they do? Isn’t that enough?”

And there you have the European standard according to Miss X. as
contrasted with the American standard which is, or has been up to this
time, something decidedly different, I am sure. We have not been so
eager to live. Our idea has been to work. No American that I have ever
known has had the idea of laying up just so much, a moderate amount,
and then retiring and living. He has had quite another thought in his
mind. The American--the average American--I am sure loves power, the
ability to do something, far more earnestly than he loves mere living.
He wants to be an officer or a director of something, a poet, anything
you please for the sake of being it--not for the sake of living. He
loves power, authority, to be able to say, “Go and he goeth,” or,
“Come and he cometh.” The rest he will waive. Mere comfort? You can
have that. But even that, according to Miss X., was not enough for
her. She had told me before, and this conversation brought it out
again, that her thoughts were of summer and winter resorts, exquisite
creations in the way of clothing, diamonds, open balconies of
restaurants commanding charming vistas, gambling tables at Monte Carlo,
Aix-les-Bains, Ostend and elsewhere, to say nothing of absolutely
untrammeled sex relations. English conventional women were frumps and
fools. They had never learned how to live; they had never understood
what the joy of freedom in sex was. Morals--they are built up on a lack
of imagination and physical vigor; tenderness--well, you have to take
care of yourself; duty--there isn’t any such thing. If there is, it’s
one’s duty to get along and have money and be happy.




CHAPTER III

AT FISHGUARD


While I was lying in my berth the fifth morning, I heard the room
steward outside my door tell some one that he thought we reached
Fishguard at one-thirty.

I packed my trunks, thinking of this big ship and the fact that my trip
was over and that never again could I cross the Atlantic for the first
time. A queer world this. We can only do any one thing significantly
once. I remember when I first went to Chicago, I remember when I first
went to St. Louis, I remember when I first went to New York. Other
trips there were, but they are lost in vagueness. But the first time of
any important thing sticks and lasts; it comes back at times and haunts
you with its beauty and its sadness. You know so well you cannot do
that any more; and, like a clock, it ticks and tells you that life is
moving on. I shall never come to England any more for the first time.
That is gone and done for--worse luck.

So I packed--will you believe it?--a little sadly. I think most of us
are a little silly at times, only we are cautious enough to conceal it.
There is in me the spirit of a lonely child somewhere and it clings
pitifully to the hand of its big mama, Life, and cries when it is
frightened; and then there is a coarse, vulgar exterior which fronts
the world defiantly and bids all and sundry to go to the devil. It
sneers and barks and jeers bitterly at times, and guffaws and cackles
and has a joyous time laughing at the follies of others.

Then I went to hunt Barfleur to find out how I should do. How much
was I to give the deck-steward; how much to the bath-steward; how much
to the room-steward; how much to the dining-room steward; how much to
“boots,” and so on.

“Look here!” observed that most efficient of all managerial souls that
I have ever known. “I’ll tell you what you do. No--I’ll write it.” And
he drew forth an ever ready envelope. “Deck-steward--so much,” it read,
“Room steward--so much--” etc.

I went forthwith and paid them, relieving my soul of a great weight.
Then I came on deck and found that I had forgotten to pack my ship
blanket, and a steamer rug, which I forthwith went and packed. Then I
discovered that I had no place for my derby hat save on my head, so
I went back and packed my cap. Then I thought I had lost one of my
brushes, which I hadn’t, though I did lose one of my stylo pencils.
Finally I came on deck and sang coon songs with Miss X., sitting in
our steamer chairs. The low shore of Ireland had come into view with
two faint hills in the distance and these fascinated me. I thought I
should have some slight emotion on seeing land again, but I didn’t. It
was gray and misty at first, but presently the sun came out beautifully
clear and the day was as warm as May in New York. I felt a sudden
elation of spirits with the coming of the sun, and I began to think
what a lovely time I was going to have in Europe.

Miss X. was a little more friendly this morning than heretofore. She
was a tricky creature--coy, uncertain and hard to please. She liked me
intellectually and thought I was able, but her physical and emotional
predilections, so far as men are concerned, did not include me.

We rejoiced together singing, and then we fought. There is a directness
between experienced intellects which waves aside all formalities. She
had seen a lot of life; so had I.

She said she thought she would like to walk a little, and we strolled
back along the heaving deck to the end of the first cabin section and
then to the stern. When we reached there the sky was overcast again,
for it was one of those changeable mornings which is now gray, now
bright, now misty. Just now the heavens were black and lowering with
soft, rain-charged clouds, like the wool of a smudgy sheep. The sea
was a rich green in consequence--not a clear green, but a dark, muddy,
oil-green. It rose and sank in its endless unrest and one or two boats
appeared--a lightship, anchored out all alone against the lowering
waste, and a small, black, passenger steamer going somewhere.

“I wish my path in life were as white as that and as straight,”
observed Miss X., pointing to our white, propeller-churned wake which
extended back for half a mile or more.

“Yes,” I observed, “you do and you don’t. You do, if it wouldn’t cost
you trouble in the future--impose the straight and narrow, as it were.”

“Oh, you don’t know,” she exclaimed irritably, that ugly fighting light
coming into her eyes, which I had seen there several times before. “You
don’t know what my life has been. I haven’t been so bad. We all of us
do the best we can. I have done the best I could, considering.”

“Yes, yes,” I observed, “you’re ambitious and alive and you’re
seeking--Heaven knows what! You would be adorable with your pretty face
and body if you were not so--so sophisticated. The trouble with you
is--”

“Oh, look at that cute little boat out there!” She was talking of the
lightship. “I always feel sorry for a poor little thing like that, set
aside from the main tide of life and left lonely--with no one to care
for it.”

“The trouble with you is,” I went on, seizing this new remark as an
additional pretext for analysis, “you’re romantic, not sympathetic.
You’re interested in that poor little lonely boat because its state is
romantic; not pathetic. It may be pathetic, but that isn’t the point
with you.”

“Well,” she said, “if you had had all the hard knocks I have had, you
wouldn’t be sympathetic either. I’ve suffered, I have. My illusions
have been killed dead.”

“Yes. Love is over with you. You can’t love any more. You can like to
be loved, that’s all. If it were the other way about--”

I paused to think how really lovely she would be with her narrow
lavender eyelids; her delicate, almost retroussé, little nose; her red
cupid’s-bow mouth.

“Oh,” she exclaimed, with a gesture of almost religious adoration. “I
cannot love any one person any more, but I can love love, and I do--all
the delicate things it stands for.”

“Flowers,” I observed, “jewels, automobiles, hotel bills, fine dresses.”

“Oh, you’re brutal. I hate you. You’ve said the cruelest, meanest
things that have ever been said to me.”

“But they’re so.”

“I don’t care. Why shouldn’t I be hard? Why shouldn’t I love to live
and be loved? Look at my life. See what I’ve had.”

“You like me, in a way?” I suggested.

“I admire your intellect.”

“Quite so. And others receive the gifts of your personality.”

“I can’t help it. I can’t be mean to the man I’m with. He’s good to
me. I won’t. I’d be sinning against the only conscience I have.”

“Then you have a conscience?”

“Oh, you go to the devil!”

But we didn’t separate by any means.

They were blowing a bugle for lunch when we came back, and down we
went. Barfleur was already at table. The orchestra was playing Auld
Lang Syne, Home Sweet Home, Dixie and the Suwannee River. It even
played one of those delicious American rags which I love so much--the
Oceana Roll. I felt a little lump in my throat at Auld Lang Syne
and Dixie, and together Miss X. and I hummed the Oceana Roll as it
was played. One of the girl passengers came about with a plate to
obtain money for the members of the orchestra, and half-crowns were
universally deposited. Then I started to eat my dessert; but Barfleur,
who had hurried off, came back to interfere.

“Come, come!” (He was always most emphatic.) “You’re missing it all.
We’re landing.”

I thought we were leaving at once. The eye behind the monocle was
premonitory of some great loss to me. I hurried on deck--to thank his
artistic and managerial instinct instantly I arrived there. Before me
was Fishguard and the Welsh coast, and to my dying day I shall never
forget it. Imagine, if you please, a land-locked harbor, as green as
grass in this semi-cloudy, semi-gold-bathed afternoon, with a half-moon
of granite scarp rising sheer and clear from the green waters to the
low gray clouds overhead. On its top I could see fields laid out in
pretty squares or oblongs, and at the bottom of what to me appeared
to be the east end of the semi-circle, was a bit of gray scruff,
which was the village no doubt. On the green water were several other
boats--steamers, much smaller, with red stacks, black sides, white
rails and funnels--bearing a family resemblance to the one we were on.
There was a long pier extending out into the water from what I took to
be the village and something farther inland that looked like a low shed.

This black hotel of a ship, so vast, so graceful, now rocking gently
in the enameled bay, was surrounded this hour by wheeling, squeaking
gulls. I always like the squeak of a gull; it reminds me of a rusty car
wheel, and, somehow, it accords with a lone, rocky coast. Here they
were, their little feet coral red, their beaks jade gray, their bodies
snowy white or sober gray, wheeling and crying--“my heart remembers
how.” I looked at them and that old intense sensation of joy came
back--the wish to fly, the wish to be young, the wish to be happy, the
wish to be loved.

But, my scene, beautiful as it was, was slipping away. One of the
pretty steamers I had noted lying on the water some distance away, was
drawing alongside--to get mails, first, they said. There were hurrying
and shuffling people on all the first cabin decks. Barfleur was forward
looking after his luggage. The captain stood on the bridge in his great
gold-braided blue overcoat. There were mail chutes being lowered from
our giant vessel’s side, and bags and trunks and boxes and bales were
then sent scuttling down. I saw dozens of uniformed men and scores of
ununiformed laborers briskly handling these in the sunshine. My fellow
passengers in their last hurrying hour interested me, for I knew I
should see them no more; except one or two, perhaps.

While we were standing here I turned to watch an Englishman, tall,
assured, stalky, stary. He had been soldiering about for some time,
examining this, that and the other in his critical, dogmatic British
way. He had leaned over the side and inspected the approaching
lighters, he had stared critically and unpoetically at the gulls which
were here now by hundreds, he had observed the landing toilet of the
ladies, the material equipment of the various men, and was quite
evidently satisfied that he himself was perfect, complete. He was
aloof, chilly, decidedly forbidding and judicial.

Finally a cabin steward came hurrying out to him.

“Did you mean to leave the things you left in your room unpacked?”
he asked. The Englishman started, stiffened, stared. I never saw a
self-sufficient man so completely shaken out of his poise.

“Things in my room unpacked?” he echoed. “What room are you talking
about? My word!”

“There are three drawers full of things in there, sir, unpacked, and
they’re waiting for your luggage now, sir!”

“My word!” he repeated, grieved, angered, perplexed. “My word! I’m
sure I packed everything. Three drawers full! My word!” He bustled off
stiffly. The attendant hastened cheerfully after. It almost gave me a
chill as I thought of his problem. And they hurry so at Fishguard. He
was well paid out, as the English say, for being so stalky and superior.

Then the mail and trunks being off, and that boat having veered away,
another and somewhat smaller one came alongside and we first, and
then the second class passengers, went aboard, and I watched the
great ship growing less and less as we pulled away from it. It was
immense from alongside, a vast skyscraper of a ship. At a hundred
feet, it seemed not so large, but more graceful; at a thousand feet,
all its exquisite lines were perfect--its bulk not so great, but
the pathos of its departing beauty wonderful; at two thousand feet,
it was still beautiful against the granite ring of the harbor; but,
alas, it was moving. The captain was an almost indistinguishable spot
upon his bridge. The stacks--in their way gorgeous--took on beautiful
proportions. I thought, as we veered in near the pier and the ship
turned within her length or thereabouts and steamed out, I had never
seen a more beautiful sight. Her convoy of gulls was still about her.
Her smoke-stacks flung back their graceful streamers. The propeller
left a white trail of foam. I asked some one: “When does she get to
Liverpool?”

“At two in the morning.”

“And when do the balance of the passengers land?” (We had virtually
emptied the first cabin.)

“At seven, I fancy.”

Just then the lighter bumped against the dock. I walked under a long,
low train-shed covering four tracks, and then I saw my first English
passenger train--a semi-octagonal-looking affair--(the ends of the cars
certainly looked as though they had started out to be octagonal) and
there were little doors on the sides labeled “First,” “First,” “First.”
On the side, at the top of the car, was a longer sign: “Cunard Ocean
Special--London--Fishguard.”




CHAPTER IV

SERVANTS AND POLITENESS


Right here I propose to interpolate my second dissertation on the
servant question and I can safely promise, I am sure, that it will not
be the last. One night, not long before, in dining with a certain Baron
N. and Barfleur at the Ritz in New York this matter of the American
servant came up in a conversational way. Baron N. was a young exquisite
of Berlin and other European capitals. He was one of Barfleur’s idle
fancies. Because we were talking about America in general I asked them
both what, to them, was the most offensive or objectionable thing about
America. One said, expectorating; the other said, the impoliteness
of servants. On the ship going over, at Fishguard, in the train from
Fishguard to London, at London and later in Barfleur’s country house I
saw what the difference was. Of course I had heard these differences
discussed before _ad lib._ for years, but hearing is not believing.
Seeing and experiencing is.

On shipboard I noticed for the first time in my life that there was an
aloofness about the service rendered by the servants which was entirely
different from that which we know in America. They did not look at one
so brutally and critically as does the American menial; their eyes did
not seem to say, “I am your equal or better,” and their motions did not
indicate that they were doing anything unwillingly. In America--and I
am a good American--I have always had the feeling that the American
hotel or house servant or store clerk--particularly store clerk--male
or female--was doing me a great favor if he did anything at all for me.
As for train-men and passenger-boat assistants, I have never been able
to look upon them as servants at all. Mostly they have looked on me as
an interloper, and as some one who should be put off the train, instead
of assisted in going anywhere. American conductors are Czars; American
brakemen and train hands are Grand Dukes, at least; a porter is little
less than a highwayman; and a hotel clerk--God forbid that we should
mention him in the same breath with any of the foregoing!

However, as I was going on to say, when I went aboard the English ship
in question I felt this burden of serfdom to the American servant
lifted. These people, strange to relate, did not seem anxious to
fight with me. They were actually civil. They did not stare me out of
countenance; they did not order me gruffly about. And, really, I am not
a princely soul looking for obsequious service. I am, I fancy, a very
humble-minded person when traveling or living, anxious to go briskly
forward, not to be disturbed too much and allowed to live in quiet and
seclusion.

The American servant is not built for that. One must have great social
or physical force to command him. At times he needs literally to be
cowed by threats of physical violence. You are paying him? Of course
you are. You help do that when you pay your hotel bill or buy your
ticket, or make a purchase, but he does not know that. The officials
of the companies for whom he works do not appear to know. If they did,
I don’t know that they would be able to do anything about it. You can
not make a whole people over by issuing a book of rules. Americans
are free men; they don’t want to be servants; they have despised the
idea for years. I think the early Americans who lived in America after
the Revolution--the anti-Tory element--thought that after the war
and having won their nationality there was to be an end of servants.
I think they associated labor of this kind with slavery, and they
thought when England had been defeated all these other things, such
as menial service, had been defeated also. Alas, superiority and
inferiority have not yet been done away with--wholly. There are the
strong and the weak; the passionate and passionless; the hungry and
the well-fed. There are those who still think that life is something
which can be put into a mold and adjusted to a theory, but I am not
one of them. I cannot view life or human nature save as an expression
of contraries--in fact, I think that is what life is. I know there can
be no sense of heat without cold; no fullness without emptiness; no
force without resistance; no anything, in short, without its contrary.
Consequently, I cannot see how there can be great men without little
ones; wealth without poverty; social movement without willing social
assistance. No high without a low, is my idea, and I would have the low
be intelligent, efficient, useful, well paid, well looked after. And
I would have the high be sane, kindly, considerate, useful, of good
report and good-will to all men.

Years of abuse and discomfort have made me rather antagonistic to
servants, but I felt no reasonable grounds for antagonism here. They
were behaving properly. They weren’t staring at me. I didn’t catch
them making audible remarks behind my back. They were not descanting
unfavorably upon any of my fellow passengers. Things were actually
going smoothly and nicely and they seemed rather courteous about it all.

Yes, and it was so in the dining-saloon, in the bath, on deck,
everywhere, with “yes, sirs,” and “thank you, sirs,” and two fingers
raised to cap visors occasionally for good measure. Were they acting?
Was this a fiercely suppressed class I was looking upon here? I
could scarcely believe it. They looked too comfortable. I saw them
associating with each other a great deal. I heard scraps of their
conversation. It was all peaceful and genial and individual enough.
They were, apparently, leading unrestricted private lives. However,
I reserved judgment until I should get to England, but at Fishguard
it was quite the same and more also. These railway guards and porters
and conductors were not our railway conductors, brakemen and porters,
by a long shot. They were different in their attitude, texture and
general outlook on life. Physically I should say that American railway
employees are superior to the European brand. They are, on the whole,
better fed, or at least better set up. They seem bigger to me, as I
recall them; harder, stronger. The English railway employee seems
smaller and more refined physically--less vigorous.

But as to manners: Heaven save the mark! These people are civil. They
are nice. They are willing. “Have you a porter, sir? Yes, sir! Thank
you, sir! This way, sir! No trouble about that, sir! In a moment, sir!
Certainly, sir! Very well, sir!” I heard these things on all sides and
they were like balm to a fevered brain. Life didn’t seem so strenuous
with these people about. They were actually trying to help me along.
I was led; I was shown; I was explained to. I got under way without
the least distress and I began actually to feel as though I was being
coddled. Why, I thought, these people are going to spoil me. I’m
going to like them. And I had rather decided that I wouldn’t like the
English. Why, I don’t know; for I never read a great English novel that
I didn’t more or less like all of the characters in it. Hardy’s lovely
country people have warmed the cockles of my heart; George Moore’s
English characters have appealed to me. And here was Barfleur. But
the way the train employees bundled me into my seat and got my bags
in after or before me, and said, “We shall be starting now in a few
minutes, sir,” and called quietly and pleadingly--not yelling, mind
you--“Take your seats, please,” delighted me.

I didn’t like the looks of the cars. I can prove in a moment by any
traveler that our trains are infinitely more luxurious. I can see where
there isn’t heat enough, and where one lavatory for men and women on
any train, let alone a first-class one, is an abomination, and so on
and so forth; but still, and notwithstanding, I say the English railway
service is better. Why? Because it’s more human; it’s more considerate.
You aren’t driven and urged to step lively and called at in loud,
harsh voices and made to feel that you are being tolerated aboard
something that was never made for you at all, but for the employees
of the company. In England the trains are run for the people, not the
people for the trains. And now that I have that one distinct difference
between England and America properly emphasized I feel much better.




CHAPTER V

THE RIDE TO LONDON


At last the train was started and we were off. The track was not so
wide, if I am not mistaken, as ours, and the little freight or goods
cars were positively ridiculous--mere wheelbarrows, by comparison
with the American type. As for the passenger cars, when I came to
examine them, they reminded me of some of our fine street cars that
run from, say Schenectady to Gloversville, or from Muncie to Marion,
Indiana. They were the first-class cars, too--the English Pullmans!
The train started out briskly and you could feel that it did not have
the powerful weight to it which the American train has. An American
Pullman creaks audibly, just as a great ship does when it begins to
move. An American engine begins to pull slowly because it has something
to pull--like a team with a heavy load. I didn’t feel that I was in a
train half so much as I did that I was in a string of baby carriages.

Miss X. and her lover, Miss E. and her maid, Barfleur and I comfortably
filled one little compartment; and now we were actually moving, and I
began to look out at once to see what English scenery was really like.
It was not at all strange to me, for in books and pictures I had seen
it all my life. But here were the actual hills and valleys, the actual
thatched cottages, and the actual castles or moors or lovely country
vistas, and I was seeing them!

As I think of it now I can never be quite sufficiently grateful to
Barfleur for a certain affectionate, thoughtful, sympathetic regard
for my every possible mood on this occasion. This was my first trip to
this England of which, of course, he was intensely proud. He was so
humanly anxious that I should not miss any of its charms or, if need
be, defects. He wanted me to be able to judge it fairly and humanly
and to see the eventual result sieved through my temperament. The soul
of attention; the soul of courtesy; patient, long-suffering, humane,
gentle. How I have tried the patience of that man at times! An iron
mood he has on occasion; a stoic one, always. Gentle, even, smiling,
living a rule and a standard. Every thought of him produces a grateful
smile. Yet he has his defects--plenty of them. Here he was at my elbow,
all the way to London, momentarily suggesting that I should not miss
the point, whatever the point might be, at the moment. He was helpful,
really interested, and above all and at all times, warmly human.

We had been just two hours getting from the boat to the train. It
was three-thirty when the train began to move, and from the lovely
misty sunshine of the morning the sky had become overcast with low,
gray--almost black--rain clouds. I looked at the hills and valleys.
They told me we were in Wales. And, curiously, as we sped along first
came Wordsworth into my mind, and then Thomas Hardy. I thought of
Wordsworth first because these smooth, kempt hills, wet with the rain
and static with deep gray shadows, suggested him. England owes so much
to William Wordsworth, I think. So far as I can see, he epitomized in
his verses this sweet, simple hominess that tugs at the heart-strings
like some old call that one has heard before. My father was a German,
my mother of Pennsylvania Dutch extraction, and yet there is a pull
here in this Shakespearian-Wordsworthian-Hardyesque world which is
precisely like the call of a tender mother to a child. I can’t resist
it. I love it; and I am not English but radically American.

I understand that Hardy is not so well thought of in England as he
might be--that, somehow, some large conservative class thinks that his
books are immoral or destructive. I should say the English would better
make much of Thomas Hardy while he is alive. He is one of their great
traditions. His works are beautiful. The spirit of all the things he
has done or attempted is lovely. He is a master mind, simple, noble,
dignified, serene. He is as fine as any of the English cathedrals.
St. Paul’s or Canterbury has no more significance to me than Thomas
Hardy. I saw St. Paul’s. I wish I could see the spirit of Thomas Hardy
indicated in some such definite way. And yet I do not. Monuments do not
indicate great men. But the fields and valleys of a country suggest
them.

At twenty or thirty miles from Fishguard we came to some open water--an
arm of the sea, I understood--the Bay of Bristol, where boats were, and
tall, rain-gutted hills that looked like tumbled-down castles. Then
came more open country--moorland, I suppose--with some sheep, once
a flock of black ones; and then the lovely alternating hues of this
rain-washed world. The water under these dark clouds took on a peculiar
luster. It looked at times like burnished steel--at times like muddy
lead. I felt my heart leap up as I thought of our own George Inness and
what he would have done with these scenes and what the English Turner
has done, though he preferred, as a rule, another key.

At four-thirty one of the charming English trainmen came and asked
if we would have tea in the dining-car. We would. We arose and in a
few moments were entering one of those dainty little basket cars. The
tables were covered with white linen and simple, pretty china and a
silver tea-service. It wasn’t as if you were traveling at all. I felt
as though I were stopping at the house of a friend; or as though I
were in the cozy corner of some well-known and friendly inn. Tea was
served. We ate toast and talked cheerfully.

This whole trip--the landscape, the dining-car, this cozy tea, Miss X.
and her lover, Miss E. and Barfleur--finally enveloped my emotional
fancy like a dream. I realized that I was experiencing a novel
situation which would not soon come again. The idea of this pretty
mistress coming to England to join her lover, and so frankly admitting
her history and her purpose, rather took my mind as an intellectual
treat. You really don’t often get to see this sort of thing. I don’t.
It’s Gallic in its flavor, to me. Barfleur, being a man of the world,
took it as a matter of course--his sole idea being, I fancy, that the
refinement of personality and thought involved in the situation were
sufficient to permit him to tolerate it. I always judge his emotion
by that one gleaming eye behind the monocle. The other does not
take my attention so much. I knew from his attitude that ethics and
morals and things like that had nothing to do with his selection of
what he would consider interesting personal companionship. Were they
interesting? Could they tell him something new? Would they amuse him?
Were they nice--socially, in their clothing, in their manners, in the
hundred little material refinements which make up a fashionable lady or
gentleman? If so, welcome. If not, hence. And talent! Oh, yes, he had a
keen eye for talent. And he loves the exceptional and will obviously do
anything and everything within his power to foster it.

Having started so late, it grew nearly dark after tea and the distant
landscapes were not so easy to descry. We came presently, in the
mist, to a place called Carmarthen, I think, where were great black
stacks and flaming forges and lights burning wistfully in the dark;
and then to another similar place, Swansea, and finally to a third,
Cardiff--great centers of manufacture, I should judge, for there were
flaming lights from forges (great, golden gleams from open furnaces)
and dark blue smoke, visible even at this hour, from tall stacks
overhead, and gleaming electric lights like bright, lucent diamonds.

I never see this sort of place but I think of Pittsburgh and Youngstown
and the coke ovens of western Pennsylvania along the line of the
Pennsylvania Railroad. I shall never forget the first time I saw
Pittsburgh and Youngstown and saw how coke was fired. It was on my way
to New York. I had never seen any mountains before and suddenly, after
the low, flat plains of Indiana and Ohio, with their pretty little
wooden villages so suggestive of the new life of the New World, we
rushed into Youngstown and then the mountains of western Pennsylvania
(the Alleghanies). It was somewhat like this night coming from
Fishguard, only it was not so rainy. The hills rose tall and green;
the forge stacks of Pittsburgh flamed with a red gleam, mile after
mile, until I thought it was the most wonderful sight I had ever seen.
And then came the coke ovens, beyond Pittsburgh mile after mile of
them, glowing ruddily down in the low valleys between the tall hills,
where our train was following a stream-bed. It seemed a great, sad,
heroic thing then, to me,--plain day labor. Those common, ignorant men,
working before flaming forges, stripped to the waist in some instances,
fascinated my imagination. I have always marveled at the inequalities
of nature--the way it will give one man a low brow and a narrow mind, a
narrow round of thought, and make a slave or horse of him, and another
a light, nimble mind, a quick wit and air and make a gentleman of him.
No human being can solve either the question of ability or utility. Is
your gentleman useful? Yes and no, perhaps. Is your laborer useful? Yes
and no, perhaps. I should say obviously yes. But see the differences in
the reward of labor--physical labor. One eats his hard-earned crust in
the sweat of his face; the other picks at his surfeit of courses and
wonders why this or that doesn’t taste better. I did not make my mind.
I did not make my art. I cannot choose my taste except by predestined
instinct, and yet here I am sitting in a comfortable English home, as
I write, commiserating the poor working man. I indict nature here and
now, as I always do and always shall do, as being aimless, pointless,
unfair, unjust. I see in the whole thing no scheme but an accidental
one--no justice save accidental justice. Now and then, in a way, some
justice is done, but it is accidental; no individual man seems to will
it. He can’t. He doesn’t know how. He can’t think how. And there’s an
end of it.

But these queer, weird, hard, sad, drab manufacturing cities--what
great writer has yet sung the song of them? Truly I do not recall one
at present clearly. Dickens gives some suggestion of what he considered
the misery of the poor; and in “Les Miserables” there is a touch of
grim poverty and want here and there. But this is something still
different. This is creative toil on a vast scale, and it is a lean,
hungry, savage, animal to contemplate. I know it is because I have
studied personally Fall River, Patterson and Pittsburgh, and I know
what I’m talking about. Life runs at a gaunt level in those places.
It’s a rough, hurtling world of fact. I suppose it is not any different
in England. I looked at the manufacturing towns as we flashed by in
the night and got the same feeling of sad commiseration and unrest.
The homes looked poor and they had a deadly sameness; the streets
were narrow and poorly lighted. I was eager to walk over one of these
towns foot by foot. I have the feeling that the poor and the ignorant
and the savage are somehow great artistically. I have always had it.
Millet saw it when he painted “The Man with the Hoe.” These drab towns
are grimly wonderful to me. They sing a great diapason of misery. I
feel hunger and misery there; I feel lust and murder and life, sick
of itself, stewing in its own juice; I feel women struck in the face
by brutal men; and sodden lives too low and weak to be roused by any
storm of woe. I fancy there are hungry babies and dying mothers and
indifferent bosses and noble directors somewhere, not caring, not
knowing, not being able to do anything about it, perhaps, if they did.
I could weep just at the sight of a large, drab, hungry manufacturing
town. I feel sorry for ignorant humanity. I wish I knew how to raise
the low foreheads; to put the clear light of intellect into sad, sodden
eyes. I wish there weren’t any blows, any hunger, any tears. I wish
people didn’t have to long bitterly for just the little thin, bare
necessities of this world. But I know, also, that life wouldn’t be as
vastly dramatic and marvelous without them. Perhaps I’m wrong. I’ve
seen some real longing in my time, though. I’ve longed myself and I’ve
seen others die longing.

Between Carmarthen and Cardiff and some other places where this drab,
hungry world seemed to stick its face into the window, I listened
to much conversation about the joyous side of living in Paris,
Monte Carlo, Ostend and elsewhere. I remember once I turned from
the contemplation of a dark, sad, shabby world scuttling by in the
night and rain to hear Miss E. telling of some Parisian music-hall
favorite--I’ll call her Carmen--rivaling another Parisian music-hall
favorite by the name of Diane, let us say, at Monte Carlo. Of course
it is understood that they were women of loose virtue. Of course it is
understood that they had fine, white, fascinating bodies and lovely
faces and that they were physically ideal. Of course it is understood
that they were marvelous mistresses and that money was flowing freely
from some source or other--perhaps from factory worlds like these--to
let them work their idle, sweet wills. Anyhow they were gambling,
racing, disporting themselves at Monte Carlo and all at once they
decided to rival each other in dress. Or perhaps it was that they
didn’t decide to, but just began to, which is much more natural and
human.

As I caught it, with my nose pressed to the carriage window and the
sight of rain and mist in my eyes, Carmen would come down one night
in splendid white silk, perhaps, her bare arms and perfect neck and
hair flashing priceless jewels; and then the fair Diane would arrive a
little later with her body equally beautifully arrayed in some gorgeous
material, her white arms and neck and hair equally resplendent. Then
the next night the gowns would be of still more marvelous material and
artistry, and more jewels--every night lovelier gowns and more costly
jewels, until one of these women took all her jewels, to the extent of
millions of francs, I presume, and, arraying her maid gorgeously, put
all the jewels on her and sent her into the casino or the ballroom or
the dining-room--wherever it was--and she herself followed, in--let
us hope--plain, jewelless black silk, with her lovely flesh showing
voluptuously against it. And the other lady was there, oh, much to her
chagrin and despair now, of course, decked with all her own splendid
jewels to the extent of an equally large number of millions of francs,
and so the rivalry was ended.

It was a very pretty story of pride and vanity and I liked it. But
just at this interesting moment, one of those great blast furnaces,
which I have been telling you about and which seemed to stretch for
miles beside the track, flashed past in the night, its open red furnace
doors looking like rubies, and the frosted windows of its lighted shops
looking like opals, and the fluttering street lamps and glittering arc
lights looking like pearls and diamonds; and I said: behold! these are
the only jewels of the poor and from these come the others. And to a
certain extent, in the last analysis and barring that unearned gift of
brain which some have without asking and others have not at all, so
they do.

It was seven or eight when we reached Paddington. For one moment, when
I stepped out of the car, the thought came to me with a tingle of
vanity--I have come by land and sea, three thousand miles to London!
Then it was gone again. It was strange--this scene. I recognized
at once the various London types caricatured in _Punch_, and _Pick
Me Up_, and _The Sketch_, and elsewhere. I saw a world of cabs and
‘busses, of porters, gentlemen, policemen, and citizens generally. I
saw characters--strange ones--that brought back Dickens and Du Maurier
and W. W. Jacobs. The words “Booking Office” and the typical London
policeman took my eye. I strolled about, watching the crowd till it was
time for us to board our train for the country; and eagerly I nosed
about, trying to sense London from this vague, noisy touch of it. I
can’t indicate how the peculiar-looking trains made me feel. Humanity
is so very different in so many little unessential things--so utterly
the same in all the large ones. I could see that it might be just as
well or better to call a ticket office a booking office; or to have
three classes of carriages instead of two, as with us; or to have
carriages instead of cars; or trams instead of street railways; or
lifts instead of elevators. What difference does it make? Life is the
same old thing. Nevertheless there was a tremendous difference between
the London and the New York atmosphere--that I could see and feel.

“A few days at my place in the country will be just the thing for you,”
Barfleur was saying. “I sent a wireless to Dora to have a fire in the
hall and in your room. You might as well see a bit of rural England
first.”

He gleamed on me with his monocled eye in a very encouraging manner.

We waited about quite awhile for a local or suburban which would take
us to Bridgely Level, and having ensconced ourselves first class--as
fitting my arrival--Barfleur fell promptly to sleep and I mused with my
window open, enjoying the country and the cool night air.




CHAPTER VI

THE BARFLEUR FAMILY


I am writing these notes on Tuesday, November twenty-eighth, very close
to a grate fire in a pretty little sitting-room in an English country
house about twenty-five miles from London, and I am very chilly.

We reached this place by some winding road, inscrutable in the night,
and I wondered keenly what sort of an atmosphere it would have. The
English suburban or country home of the better class has always been
a concrete thought to me--rather charming on the whole. A carriage
brought us, with all the bags and trunks carefully looked after (in
England you always keep your luggage with you), and we were met in the
hall by the maid who took our coats and hats and brought us something
to drink. There was a small fire glowing in the fireplace in the
entrance hall, but it was so small--cheerful though it was--that I
wondered why Barfleur had taken all the trouble to send a wireless
from the sea to have it there. It seems it is a custom, in so far as
his house is concerned, not to have it. But having heard something of
English fires and English ideas of warmth, I was not greatly surprised.

“I am going to be cold,” I said to myself, at once. “I know it. The
atmosphere is going to be cold and raw and I am going to suffer
greatly. It will be the devil and all to write.”

I fancy this is a very fair and pretty example of the average country
home near London, and it certainly lacks none of the appointments
which might be considered worthy of a comfortable home; but it is as
cold as a sepulcher, and I can’t understand the evoluted system of
procedure which has brought about any such uncomfortable state and
maintains it as satisfactory. These Britons are actually warm when
the temperature in the room is somewhere between forty-five and fifty
and they go about opening doors and windows with the idea that the
rooms need additional airing. They build you small, weak coal fires in
large, handsome fireplaces, and then if the four or five coals huddled
together are managing to keep themselves warm by glowing, they tell you
that everything is all right (or stroll about, at least, looking as
though it were). Doors are left open; the casement windows flung out,
everything done to give the place air and draughtiness.

“Now,” said my host, with his usual directness of speech, as I stood
with my back to the hall fireplace, “I think it is best that you should
go to bed at once and get a good night’s rest. In the morning you shall
have your breakfast at whatever hour you say. Your bath will be brought
you a half or three-quarters of an hour before you appear at table, so
that you will have ample time to shave and dress. I shall be here until
eleven-fifteen to see how you are getting along, after which I shall
go to the city. You shall have a table here, or wherever you like, and
the maid will serve your luncheon punctually at two o’clock. At half
past four your tea will be brought to you, in case you are here. In the
evening we dine at seven-thirty. I shall be down on the five fifty-two
train.”

So he proceeded definitely to lay out my life for me and I had to
smile. “That vast established order which is England,” I thought
again. He accompanied me to my chamber door, or rather to the foot of
the stairs. There he wished me pleasant dreams. “And remember,” he
cautioned me with the emphasis of one who has forgotten something of
great consequence, “this is most important. Whatever you do, don’t
forget to put out your boots for the maid to take and have blacked.
Otherwise you will disrupt the whole social procedure of England.”

It is curious--this feeling of being quite alone for the first time in
a strange land. I began to unpack my bags, solemnly thinking of New
York. Presently I went to the window and looked out. One or two small
lights burned afar off. I undressed and got into bed, feeling anything
but sleepy. I lay and watched the fire flickering on the hearth. So
this was really England, and here I was at last--a fact absolutely of
no significance to any one else in the world, but very important to me.
An old, old dream come true! And it had passed so oddly--the trip--so
almost unconsciously, as it were. We make a great fuss, I thought,
about the past and the future, but the actual moment is so often
without meaning. Finally, after hearing a rooster crow and thinking of
Hamlet’s father--his ghost--and the chill that invests the thought of
cock-crow in that tragedy, I slept.

       *       *       *       *       *

Morning came and with it a knocking on the door. I called, “Come in.”
In came the maid, neat, cleanly, rosy-cheeked, bringing a large tin
basin--very much wider than an American tub but not so deep--a large
water can, full of hot water, towels and the like. She put the tub and
water can down, drew a towel rack from the wall nearby, spread out the
towels and left.

I did not hear her take the boots, but when I went to the door they
were gone. In the afternoon they were back again, nice and bright. I
speculated on all this as an interesting demonstration of English life.
Barfleur is not so amazingly well-to-do, but he has all these things.
It struck me as pleasing, soothing, orderly--quite the same thing I
had been seeing on the train and the ship. It was all a part of that
interesting national system which I had been hearing so much about.

At breakfast it was quite the same--a most orderly meal. Barfleur was
there to breakfast with me and see that I was started right. His face
was smiling. How did I like it? Was I comfortable? Had I slept well?
Had I slept very well? It was bad weather, but I would rather have to
expect that at this season of the year.

I can see his smiling face--a little cynical and disillusioned--get
some faint revival of his own native interest in England in my
surprise, curiosity and interest. The room was cold, but he did not
seem to think so. No, no, no, it was very comfortable. I was simply not
acclimated yet. I would get used to it.

This house was charming, I thought, and here at breakfast I was
introduced to the children. Berenice Mary Barfleur, the only girl and
the eldest child, looked to me at first a little pale and thin--quite
peaked, in fact--but afterwards I found her not to be so--merely a
temperamental objection on my part to a type which afterwards seemed to
me very attractive. She was a decidedly wise, high-spoken, intellectual
and cynical little maid. Although only eleven years of age she
conversed with the air, the manner and the words of a woman of twenty.

“Oh, yes. Amáyreeka! Is that a nice place? Do you like it?”

I cannot in the least way convey the touch of lofty, well-bred feeling
it had--quite the air and sound of a woman of twenty-five or thirty
schooled in all the niceties of polite speech. “What a child,” I
thought. “She talks as though she were affected, but I can see that
she is not.” Quite different she seemed from what any American child
could be--less vigorous, more intellectual, more spiritual; perhaps not
so forceful but probably infinitely more subtle. She looked delicate,
remote, Burne-Jonesy--far removed from the more commonplace school of
force we know--and I think I like our type better. I smiled at her and
she seemed friendly enough, but there was none of that running forward
and greeting people which is an average middle-class American habit.
She was too well bred. I learned afterward, from a remark dropped at
table by her concerning American children, that it was considered bad
form. “American children are the kind that run around hotel foyers with
big bows on their hair and speak to people,” was the substance of it. I
saw at once how bad American children were.

Well, then came the eldest boy, Percy Franklin Barfleur, who reminded
me, at first glance, of that American caricature type--dear to
the newspaper cartoonist--of Little Johnnie Bostonbeans. Here he
was--“glawses,” inquiring eyes, a bulging forehead, a learned air;
and all at ten years, and somewhat undersized for his age--a clever
child; sincere, apparently; rather earnest; eager to know, full of the
light of youthful understanding. Like his sister, his manners were
quite perfect but unstudied. He smiled and replied, “Quite well, thank
you,” to my amused inquiries after him. I could see he was bright and
thoughtful, but the unconscious (though, to me, affected) quality
of the English voice amused me here again. Then came Charles Gerard
Barfleur, and James Herbert Barfleur, who impressed me in quite the
same way as the others. They were nice, orderly children but English,
oh, so English!

It was while walking in the garden after breakfast that I encountered
James Herbert Barfleur, the youngest; but, in the confusion of meeting
people generally, I did not recognize him. He was outside the coach
house, where are the rooms of the gardener, and where my room is.

“And which little Barfleur might this be?” I asked genially, in that
patronizing way we have with children.

“James Herbert Barfleur,” he replied, with a gravity of pronunciation
which quite took my breath away. We are not used to this formal dignity
of approach in children of so very few years in America. This lad was
only five years of age and he was talking to me in the educated voice
of one of fifteen or sixteen. I stared, of course.

“You don’t tell me,” I replied. “And what is your sister’s name, again?”

“Berenice Mary Barfleur,” he replied.

“Dear, dear, dear,” I sighed. “Now what do you know about that?”

Of course such a wild piece of American slang as that had no
significance to him whatsoever. It fell on his ears without meaning.

“I don’t know,” he replied, interested in some fixture he was fastening
to a toy bath tub.

“Isn’t that a fine little bath tub you have,” I ventured, eager to
continue the conversation because of its novelty.

“It’s a nice little bawth,” he went on, “but I wouldn’t call it a tub.”

I really did not know how to reply to this last, it took me so by
surprise;--a child of five, in little breeches scarcely larger than my
two hands, making this fine distinction. “We surely live and learn,” I
thought, and went on my way smiling.

This house interested me from so many other points of view, being
particularly English and new, that I was never weary of investigating
it. I had a conversation with the gardener one morning concerning his
duties and found that he had an exact schedule of procedure which
covered every day in the year. First, I believe, he got hold of the
boots, delivered to him by the maid, and did those; and then he brought
up his coal and wood and built the fires; and then he had some steps
and paths to look after; and then some errands to do, I forget what.
There was the riding pony to curry and saddle, the stable to clean--oh,
quite a long list of things which he did over and over, day after
day. He talked with such an air of responsibility, as so many English
servants do, that I was led to reflect upon the reliability of English
servants in general; and he dropped his h’s where they occurred, of
course, and added them where they shouldn’t have been. He told me how
much he received, how much he had received, how he managed to live on
it, how shiftless and irresponsible some people were.

“They don’t know ’ow to get along, sir,” he informed me with the same
solemn air of responsibility. “They just doesn’t know ’ow to manige,
sir, I tyke it; some people doesn’t, sir. They gets sixteen or highteen
shillin’s, the same as me, sir, but hawfter they goes and buys five or
six g’uns (I thought he said guns--he actually said gallons) o’ beer in
the week, there hain’t much left fer other things, is there, sir? Now
that’s no wy, sir, is it, sir? I hawsk you.”

I had to smile at the rural accent. He was so simple minded--so
innocent, apparently. Every one called him Wilkins--not Mr. Wilkins (as
his colleagues might in America) or John or Jack or some sobriquet, but
just Wilkins. He was Wilkins to every one--the master, the maid, the
children. The maid was Dora to every one, and the nurse, Nana. It was
all interesting to me because it was so utterly new.

And then this landscape round about; the feel of the country was
refreshing. I knew absolutely nothing about it, and yet I could see
and feel that we were in a region of comfortable suburban life. I
could hear the popping of guns all day long, here--and thereabouts--this
being the open season for shooting, not hunting, as my host informed
me; there was no such thing as hunting hereabouts. I could see men
strolling here and there together, guns under their arms, plaid caps
on their heads, in knee breeches, and leather leggings. I could see,
from my writing desk in the drawing-room window, clever-riding English
girls bounding by on light-moving horses, and in my limited walks I
saw plenty of comfortable-looking country places--suburban homes. I
was told by a friend of mine that this was rather a pleasant country
section, but that I might see considerable of the same thing anywhere
about London at this distance.

“Dora” the maid interested me very much. She was so quiet, so silent
and so pretty. The door would open, any time during the day when I was
writing, and in she would come to look after the fire, to open or close
the windows, to draw the curtains, light the candles and serve the tea,
or to call me to luncheon or dinner. Usually I ate my luncheon and
drank my four-o’clock tea alone. I ate my evening meal all alone once.
It made no difference--my eating alone. The service was quite the same;
the same candles were lighted--several brackets on different parts of
the table; the fire built in the dining-room. There were four or five
courses and wine. Dora stood behind me watching me eat in silence, and
I confess I felt very queer. It was all so solemn, so stately. I felt
like some old gray baron or bachelor shut away from the world and given
to contemplating the follies of his youth. When through with nuts and
wine--the final glass of port--it was the custom of the house to retire
to the drawing-room and drink the small cup of black coffee which was
served there. And on this night, although I was quite alone, it was the
same. The coffee was served just as promptly and dignifiedly as though
there were eight or ten present. It interested me greatly, all of it,
and pleased me more than I can say.

Personally I shall always be glad that I saw some rural aspects
of England first, for they are the most characterful and, to me,
significant. London is an amazing city and thoroughly English, but
the rural districts are more suggestive. In what respects do the
people of one country differ from those of another, since they eat,
sleep, rise, dress, go to work, return, love, hate, and aspire alike?
In little--dynamically, mechanically speaking. But temperamentally,
emotionally, spiritually and even materially they differ in almost
every way. England is a mood, I take it, a combination of dull
colors and atmosphere. It expresses heaven only knows what feeling
for order, stability, uniformity, homeliness, simplicity. It is
highly individual--more so almost than Italy, France or Germany. It
is vital--and yet vital in an intellectual way only. You would say
off-hand, sensing the feel of the air, that England is all mind with
convictions, prejudices, notions, poetic longings terribly emphasized.
The most egotistic nation in the world because, perhaps, the most
forcefully intellectual.

How different is the very atmosphere of it from America. The great open
common about this house smacked of English individuality, leisure,
order, stratification--anything you will. The atmosphere was mistily
damp, the sun at best a golden haze. All the bare trees were covered
with a thin coating of almost spring-green moss. The ground was
springy, dewy. Rooks were in the sky, the trees. Little red houses
in the valleys, with combination flues done in quaint individual
chimney pots send upward soft spirals of blue smoke. Laborers, their
earth-colored trousers strapped just below the knees by a small leather
strap, appeared ever and anon; housemaids, spick and span, with black
dresses, white aprons, white laces in their hair, becoming streamers of
linen made into large trig bows at their backs, appeared at some door
or some window of almost every home. The sun glints into such orderly,
well-dressed windows; the fields suspire such dewy fragrances. You can
encounter hills of sheep, creaking wains, open common land of gorse
and wild berries. My little master, smartly clad, dashes by on a pony;
my young mistress looks becomingly gay and superior on a Shetland or
a cob. A four-year-old has a long-eared white donkey to ride. That is
England.

How shall it be said--how described? It is so delicate, so remote, so
refined, so smooth, a pleasant land of great verse and great thought.




CHAPTER VII

A GLIMPSE OF LONDON


After a few days I went to London for the first time--I do not
count the night of my arrival, for I saw nothing but the railway
terminus--and, I confess, I was not impressed as much as I might have
been. I could not help thinking on this first morning, as we passed
from Paddington, via Hyde Park, Marble Arch, Park Lane, Brook Street,
Grosvenor Square, Berkeley Square, Piccadilly and other streets to
Regent Street and the neighborhood of the Carlton Hotel, that it was
beautiful, spacious, cleanly, dignified and well ordered, but not
astonishingly imposing. Fortunately it was a bright and comfortable
morning and the air was soft. There was a faint bluish haze over the
city, which I took to be smoke; and certainly it smelled as though it
were smoky. I had a sense of great life but not of crowded life, if I
manage to make myself clear by that. It seemed to me at first blush
as if the city might be so vast that no part was important. At every
turn Barfleur, who was my ever-present monitor, was explaining, “Now
this that we are coming to,” or “This that we are passing,” or “This is
so and so;” and so we sped by interesting things, the city impressing
me in a vague way but meaning very little at the moment. We must have
passed through a long stretch of Piccadilly, for Barfleur pointed out a
line of clubs, naming them--the St. James’s Club, the Savile Club, the
Lyceum Club, and then St. James’s Palace.

I was duly impressed. I was seeing things which, after all, I thought,
did not depend so much upon their exterior beauty or vast presence as
upon the import of their lineage and connections. They were beautiful
in a low, dark way, and certainly they were tinged with an atmosphere
of age and respectability. After all, since life is a figment of the
brain, built-up notions of things are really far more impressive in
many cases than the things themselves. London is a fanfare of great
names; it is a clatter of vast reputations; it is a swirl of memories
and celebrated beauties and orders and distinctions. It is almost
impossible any more to disassociate the real from the fictitious or,
better, spiritual. There is something here which is not of brick
and stone at all, but which is purely a matter of thought. It is
disembodied poetry; noble ideas; delicious memories of great things;
and these, after all, are better than brick and stone. The city is
low--universally not more than five stories high, often not more than
two, but it is beautiful. And it alternates great spaces with narrow
crevices in such a way as to give a splendid variety. You can have
at once a sense of being very crowded and of being very free. I can
understand now Browning’s desire to include “poor old Camberwell” with
Italy in the confines of romance.

The thing that struck me most in so brief a survey--we were surely
not more than twenty minutes in reaching our destination--was that
the buildings were largely a golden yellow in color, quite as if they
had been white and time had stained them. Many other buildings looked
as though they had been black originally and had been daubed white
in spots. The truth is that it was quite the other way about. They
had been snow white and had been sooted by the smoke until they were
now nearly coal black. And only here and there had the wind and rain
whipped bare white places which looked like scars or the drippings of
lime. At first I thought, “How wretched.” Later I thought, “This effect
is charming.”

We are so used to the new and shiny and tall in America, particularly
in our larger cities, that it is very hard at first to estimate a
city of equal or greater rank, which is old and low and, to a certain
extent, smoky. In places there was more beauty, more surety, more
dignity, more space than most of our cities have to offer. The police
had an air of dignity and intelligence such as I have never seen
anywhere in America. The streets were beautifully swept and clean;
and I saw soldiers here and there in fine uniforms, standing outside
palaces and walking in the public ways. That alone was sufficient
to differentiate London from any American city. We rarely see our
soldiers. They are too few. I think what I felt most of all was that I
could not feel anything very definite about so great a city and that
there was no use trying.

We were soon at the bank where I was to have my American order for
money cashed; and then, after a short walk in a narrow street, we
were at the office of Barfleur, where I caught my first glimpse of an
English business house. It was very different from an American house of
the same kind, for it was in an old and dark building of not more than
four stories--and set down in a narrow angle off the Strand and lighted
by small lead-paned windows, which in America would smack strongly of
Revolutionary days. In fact we have scarcely any such buildings left.
Barfleur’s private offices were on the second floor, up a small dingy
staircase, and the room itself was so small that it surprised me by its
coziness. I could not call it dingy. It was quaint rather, Georgian in
its atmosphere, with a small open fire glowing in one corner, a great
rolltop desk entirely out of keeping with the place in another, a
table, a book-case, a number of photographs of celebrities framed, and
the rest books. I think he apologized for, or explained the difference
between, this and the average American business house, but I do not
think explanations are in order. London is London. I should be sorry if
it were exactly like New York, as it may yet become. The smallness and
quaintness appealed to me as a fit atmosphere for a healthy business.

I should say here that this preliminary trip to London from Bridgely
Level, so far as Barfleur was concerned, was intended to accomplish
three things: first, to give me a preliminary glimpse of London;
second, to see that I was measured and examined for certain articles of
clothing in which I was, according to Barfleur, woefully lacking; and
third, to see that I attended the concert of a certain Austrian singer
whose singing he thought I might enjoy. It was most important that I
should go, because he had to go; and since all that I did or could do
was merely grist for my mill, I was delighted to accompany him.

Barfleur in many respects, I wish to repeat here, is one of the most
delightful persons in the world. He is a sort of modern Beau Brummel
with literary, artistic and gormandizing leanings. He loves order and
refinement, of course,--things in their proper ways and places--as he
loves life. I suspect him at times of being somewhat of a martinet in
home and office matters; but I am by no means sure that I am not doing
him a grave injustice. A more even, complaisant, well-mannered and
stoical soul, who manages to get his way in some fashion or other, if
it takes him years to do it, I never met. He surely has the patience
of fate and, I think, the true charity of a great heart. Now before I
could be properly presented in London and elsewhere I needed a long
list of things. So this morning I had much shopping to attend to.

Since the matter of English and American money had been troubling me
from the moment I reached that stage on my voyage where I began to
pay for things out of my own pocket to the ship’s servants, I began
complaining of my difficulties now. I couldn’t figure out the tips to
my own satisfaction and this irritated me. I remember urging Barfleur
to make the whole matter clear to me, which he did later. He gave me a
typewritten statement as to the relative value of the various pieces
and what tips I should pay and how and when at hotels and country
houses, and this I followed religiously. Here it is:

    In leaving the hotel to-morrow, give the following tips:

            Maid                                  3/-
            Valet                                 3/-
            Gold Braid                            1/-
            Porter (who looks after telephone)    1/-
            Outside Man (Doorman)                 1/-

    If you reckon at a hotel to give 9d. a day to the maid and the
    valet, with a minimum of 1/-, you will be doing handsomely. On
    a visit, on the supposition that they have only maids, give the
    two maids whom you are likely to come across 2/6 each, when
    you come away on Monday. (I am speaking of weekends.) Longer
    periods should be figured at 9d. a day. If, on the other hand,
    it is a large establishment--butler and footman--you would have
    to give the butler 10/- and the footman 5/- for a week-end; for
    longer periods more.

I cannot imagine anything more interesting than being introduced
as I was by Barfleur to the social character of London. He was so
intelligent and so very nice about it all. “Now, first,” he said, “we
will get your glasses mended; and then you want a traveling bag; and
then some ties and socks, and so on. I have an appointment with you at
your tailor’s at eleven o’clock, where you are to be measured for your
waistcoats, and at eleven-thirty at your furrier’s, where you are to be
measured for your fur coat,” and so on and so forth. “Well, come along.
We’ll be off.”

I have to smile when I think of it, for I, of all people, am the least
given to this matter of proper dressing and self-presentation, and
Barfleur, within reasonable limits, represents the other extreme.
To him, as I have said, these things are exceedingly important. The
delicate manner in which he indicated and urged me into getting the
things which would be all right, without openly insisting on them,
was most pleasing. “In England, you know,” he would hint, “it isn’t
quite good form to wear a heavy striped tie with a frock coat--never a
straight black; and we never tie them in that fashion--always a simple
knot.” My socks had to be striped for morning wear and my collars
winged, else I was in very bad form indeed. I fell into the habit of
asking, “What now?”

London streets and shops as I first saw them interested me greatly.
I saw at once more uniforms than one would ordinarily see in New
York, and more high hats and, presumably,--I could not tell for the
overcoats--cutaway coats. The uniforms were of mail-men, porters,
messenger-boys and soldiers; and all being different from what I had
been accustomed to, they interested me--the mail-men particularly, with
a service helmet cut square off at the top; and the little messenger
boys, with their tambourine caps cocked joyously over one ear, amused
me; the policeman’s helmet strap under his chin was new and diverting.

In the stores the clerks first attracted my attention, but I may say
the stores and shops themselves, after New York, seemed small and old.
New York is so new; the space given to the more important shops is
so considerable. In London it struck me that the space was not much
and that the woodwork and walls were dingy. One can tell by the feel
of a place whether it is exceptional and profitable, and all of these
were that; but they were dingy. The English clerk, too, had an air of
civility, I had almost said servility, which was different. They looked
to me like individuals born to a condition and a point of view; and I
think they are. In America any clerk may subsequently be anything he
chooses (ability guaranteed), but I’m not so sure that this is true in
England. Anyhow, the American clerk always looks his possibilities--his
problematic future; the English clerk looks as if he were to be one
indefinitely.

We were through with this round by one o’clock, and Barfleur explained
that we would go to a certain very well-known hotel grill.

The hotel, after its fashion--the grill--was a distinct blow. I had
fancied that I was going to see something on the order of the luxurious
new hotel in New York--certainly as resplendent, let us say, as our
hotels of the lower first class. Not so. It could be compared, and I
think fairly so, only to our hotels of the second or third class. There
was the same air of age here that there was about our old but very
excellent hotels in New York. The woodwork was plain, the decorations
simple.

As for the crowd, well, Barfleur stated that it might be smart and it
might not. Certain publishers, rich Jewish merchants, a few actors and
some Americans would probably be here. This grill was affected by the
foreign element. The _maître d’hôtel_ was French, of course--a short,
fat, black-whiskered man who amused me by his urbanity. The waiters
were, I believe, German, as they are largely in London and elsewhere in
England. One might almost imagine Germany intended invading England
via its waiters. The china and plate were simple and inexpensive,
almost poor. A great hotel can afford to be simple. We had what we
would have had at any good French restaurant, and the crowd was rather
commonplace-looking to me. Several American girls came in and they were
good-looking, smart but silly. I cannot say that I was impressed at
all, and my subsequent experiences confirm that feeling. I am inclined
to think that London hasn’t one hotel of the material splendor of the
great new hotels in New York. But let that go for the present.

While we were sipping coffee Barfleur told me of a Mrs. W., a friend
of his whom I was to meet. She was, he said, a lion-hunter. She tried
to make her somewhat interesting personality felt in so large a sea
as London by taking up with promising talent before it was already
a commonplace. I believe it was arranged over the ’phone then that
I should lunch there--at Mrs. W.’s--the following day at one and be
introduced to a certain Lady R., who was known as a patron of the arts,
and a certain Miss H., an interesting English type. I was pleased with
the idea of going. I had never seen an English lady lion-hunter. I had
never met English ladies of the types of Lady R. and Miss H. There
might be others present. I was also informed that Mrs. W. was really
not English but Danish; but she and her husband, who was also Danish
and a wealthy broker, had resided in London so long that they were to
all intents and purposes English, and in addition to being rich they
were in rather interesting standing socially.

After luncheon we went to hear a certain Miss T., an Austrian of about
thirty years of age, sing at some important hall in London--Bechstein
Hall, I believe it was,--and on the way I was told something of her.
It seemed that she was very promising--a great success in Germany
and elsewhere as a concert-singer--and that she might be coming to
America at some time or other. Barfleur had known her in Paris. He
seemed to think I would like her. We went and I heard a very lovely
set of songs--oh, quite delightful, rendered in a warm, sympathetic,
enthusiastic manner, and representing the most characteristic type of
German love sentiment. It is a peculiar sentiment--tender, wistful,
smacking of the sun at evening and lovely water on which the moon is
shining. German sentiment verges on the mushy--is always close to
tears--but anything more expressive of a certain phase of life I do not
know.

Miss T. sang forcefully, joyously, vigorously, and I wished sincerely
to meet her and tell her so; but that was not to be, then.

As we made our way to Paddington Barfleur, brisk and smiling, asked:

“Were you amused?”

“Quite.”

“Well, then this afternoon was not wasted. I shall always be satisfied
if you are amused.”

I smiled, and we rode sleepily back to Bridgely Level to dine and
thence to bed.




CHAPTER VIII

A LONDON DRAWING-ROOM


I recall the next day, Sunday, with as much interest as any date, for
on that day at one-thirty I encountered my first London drawing-room.
I recall now as a part of this fortunate adventure that we had been
talking of a new development in French art, which Barfleur approved
in part and disapproved in part--the Post-Impressionists; and there
was mention also of the Cubists--a still more radical departure from
conventional forms, in which, if my impressions are correct, the artist
passes from any attempt at transcribing the visible scene and becomes
wholly geometric, metaphysical and symbolic.

When I reached the house of Mrs. W., which was in one of those lovely
squares that constitute such a striking feature of the West End, I was
ushered upstairs to the drawing-room, where I found my host, a rather
practical, shrewd-looking Dane, and his less obviously Danish wife.

“Oh, Mr. Der_riz_er,” exclaimed my hostess on sight, as she came
forward to greet me, a decidedly engaging woman of something over
forty, with bronze hair and ruddy complexion. Her gown of green silk,
cut after the latest mode, stamped her in my mind as of a romantic,
artistic, eager disposition.

“You must come and tell us at once what you think of the picture we
are discussing. It is downstairs. Lady R. is there and Miss H. We are
trying to see if we can get a better light on it. Mr. Barfleur has told
me of you. You are from America. You must tell us how you like London,
after you see the Degas.”

I think I liked this lady thoroughly at a glance and felt at home with
her, for I know the type. It is the mobile, artistic type, with not
much practical judgment in great matters, but bubbling with enthusiasm,
temperament, life.

“Certainly--delighted. I know too little of London to talk of it. I
shall be interested in your picture.”

We had reached the main floor by this time.

“Mr. Der_riz_er, the Lady R.”

A modern suggestion of the fair Jahane, tall, astonishingly lissom,
done--as to clothes--after the best manner of the romanticists--such
was the Lady R. A more fascinating type--from the point of view of
stagecraft--I never saw. And the languor and lofty elevation of her
gestures and eyebrows defy description. She could say, “Oh, I am so
weary of all this,” with a slight elevation of her eyebrows a hundred
times more definitely and forcefully than if it had been shouted in
stentorian tones through a megaphone.

She gave me the fingers of an archly poised hand.

“It is a pleasure!”

“And Miss H., Mr. Der_riz_er.”

“I am very pleased!”

A pink, slim lily of a woman, say twenty-eight or thirty, very
fragile-seeming, very Dresden-china-like as to color, a dream of light
and Tyrian blue with some white interwoven, very keen as to eye, the
perfection of hauteur as to manner, so well-bred that her voice seemed
subtly suggestive of it all--that was Miss H.

To say that I was interested in this company is putting it mildly. The
three women were so distinct, so individual, so characteristic, each
in a different way. The Lady R. was all peace and repose--statuesque,
weary, dark. Miss H. was like a ray of sunshine, pure morning light,
delicate, gay, mobile. Mrs. W. was of thicker texture, redder blood,
more human fire. She had a vigor past the comprehension of either, if
not their subtlety of intellect--which latter is often so much better.

Mr. W. stood in the background, a short, stocky gentleman, a little
bored by the trivialities of the social world.

“Ah, yes. Daygah! You like Daygah, no doubt,” interpolated Mrs. W.,
recalling us. “A lovely pigture, don’t you think? Such color! such
depth! such sympathy of treatment! Oh!”

Mrs. W.’s hands were up in a pretty artistic gesture of delight.

“Oh, yes,” continued the Lady R., taking up the rapture. “It is saw
human--saw perfect in its harmony. The hair--it is divine! And the
poor man! he lives alone now, in Paris, quite dreary, not seeing any
one. Aw, the tragedy of it! The tragedy of it!” A delicately carved
vanity-box she carried, of some odd workmanship--blue and white enamel,
with points of coral in it--was lifted in one hand as expressing her
great distress. I confess I was not much moved and I looked quickly at
Miss H. Her eyes, it seemed to me, held a subtle, apprehending twinkle.

“And you!” It was Mrs. W. addressing me.

“It is impressive, I think. I do not know as much of his work as I
might, I am sorry to say.”

“Ah, he is marvelous, wonderful! I am transported by the beauty and the
depth of it all!” It was Mrs. W. talking and I could not help rejoicing
in the quality of her accent. Nothing is so pleasing to me in a woman
of culture and refinement as that additional tang of remoteness which
a foreign accent lends. If only all the lovely, cultured women of the
world could speak with a foreign accent in their native tongue I would
like it better. It lends a touch of piquancy not otherwise obtainable.

Our luncheon party was complete now and we would probably have gone
immediately into the dining-room except for another picture--by
Piccasso. Let me repeat here that before Barfleur called my attention
to Piccasso’s cubical uncertainty in the London Exhibition, I had
never heard of him. Here in a dark corner of the room was the nude
torso of a consumptive girl, her ribs showing, her cheeks colorless
and sunken, her nose a wasted point, her eyes as hungry and sharp and
lustrous as those of a bird. Her hair was really no hair--strings. And
her thin bony arms and shoulders were pathetic, decidedly morbid in
their quality. To add to the morgue-like aspect of the composition, the
picture was painted in a pale bluish-green key.

I wish to state here that now, after some little lapse of time, this
conception--the thought and execution of it--is growing upon me. I am
not sure that this work which has rather haunted me is not much more
than a protest--the expression and realization of a great temperament.
But at the moment it struck me as dreary, gruesome, decadent, and I
said as much when asked for my impression.

“Gloomy! Morbid!” Mrs. W. fired in her quite lovely accent. “What has
that to do with art?”

“Luncheon is served, Madam!”

The double doors of the dining-room were flung open.

I found myself sitting between Mrs. W. and Miss H.

“I was so glad to hear you say you didn’t like it,” Miss H. applauded,
her eyes sparkling, her lip moving with a delicate little smile. “You
know, I abhor those things. They _are_ decadent like the rest of France
and England. We are going backward instead of forward--I am quite sure.
We have not the force we once had. It is all a race after pleasure and
living and an interest in subjects of that kind. I am quite sure it
isn’t healthy, normal art. I am sure life is better and brighter than
that.”

“I am inclined to think so, at times, myself,” I replied.

We talked further and I learned to my surprise that she suspected
England to be decadent as a whole, falling behind in brain, brawn and
spirit and that she thought America was much better.

“Do you know,” she observed, “I really think it would be a very good
thing for us if we were conquered by Germany.”

I had found here, I fancied, some one who was really thinking for
herself and a very charming young lady in the bargain. She was quick,
apprehensive, all for a heartier point of view. I am not sure now that
she was not merely being nice to me, and that anyhow she is not all
wrong, and that the heartier point of view is the courage which can
front life unashamed; which sees the divinity of fact and of beauty
in the utmost seeming tragedy. Piccasso’s grim presentation of decay
and degradation is beginning to teach me something--the marvelous
perfection of the spirit which is concerned with neither perfection,
nor decay, but life. It haunts me.

The charming luncheon was quickly over and I think I gathered a very
clear impression of the status of my host and hostess from their
surroundings. Mr. W. was evidently liberal in his understanding of what
constitutes a satisfactory home. It was not exceptional in that it
differed greatly from the prevailing standard of luxury. But assuredly
it was all in sharp contrast to Piccasso’s grim representation of life
and Degas’s revolutionary opposition to conventional standards.

[Illustration: “I like it,” he pronounced. “The note is somber, but it
is excellent work”]

Another man now made his appearance--an artist. I shall not forget
him soon, for you do not often meet people who have the courage to
appear at Sunday afternoons in a shabby workaday business suit,
unpolished shoes, a green neckerchief in lieu of collar and tie,
and cuffless sleeves. I admired the quality, the workmanship of the
silver-set scarab which held his green linen neckerchief together,
but I was a little puzzled as to whether he was very poor and his
presence insisted upon, or comfortably progressive and indifferent
to conventional dress. His face and body were quite thin; his hands
delicate. He had an apprehensive eye that rarely met one’s direct gaze.

“Do you think art really needs that?” Miss H. asked me. She was
alluding to the green linen handkerchief.

“I admire the courage. It is at least individual.”

“It is after George Bernard Shaw. It has been done before,” replied
Miss H.

“Then it requires almost more courage,” I replied.

Here Mrs. W. moved the sad excerpt from the morgue to the center of the
room that he of the green neckerchief might gaze at it.

“I like it,” he pronounced. “The note is somber, but it is excellent
work.”

Then he took his departure with interesting abruptness. Soon the Lady
R. was extending her hand in an almost pathetic farewell. Her voice was
lofty, sad, sustained. I wish I could describe it. There was just a
suggestion of Lady Macbeth in the sleep-walking scene. As she made her
slow, graceful exit I wanted to applaud loudly.

Mrs. W. turned to me as the nearest source of interest and I realized
with horror that she was going to fling her Piccasso at my head again
and with as much haste as was decent I, too, took my leave.




CHAPTER IX

CALLS


It was one evening shortly after I had lunched with Mrs. W. that
Barfleur and I dined with Miss E., the young actress who had come over
on the steamer with us. It was interesting to find her in her own
rather smart London quarters surrounded by maid and cook, and with
male figures of the usual ornamental sort in the immediate background.
One of them was a ruddy, handsome, slightly corpulent French count of
manners the pink of perfection. He looked for all the world like the
French counts introduced into American musical comedy,--just the right
type of collar about his neck, the perfect shoe, the close-fitting,
well-tailored suit, the mustachios and hair barbered to the last touch.
He was charming, too, in his easy, gracious aloofness, saying only the
few things that would be of momentary interest and pressing nothing.

Miss E. had prepared an appetizing luncheon. She had managed to collect
a group of interesting people--a Mr. T., for instance, whose _bête
noire_ was clergymen and who stood prepared by collected newspaper
clippings and court proceedings, gathered over a period of years, to
prove that all ecclesiastics were scoundrels. He had, as he insisted,
amazing data, showing that the most perverted of all English criminals
were usually sons of bishops and that the higher you rose in the scale
of hieratic authority the worse were the men in charge. The delightful
part of it all was the man’s profound seriousness of manner, a thin,
magnetic, albeit candle-waxy type of person of about sixty-five who had
the force and enthusiasm of a boy.

“Ah, yes,” you would hear him exclaim often during lunch, “I know
him well. A greater scoundrel never lived. His father is bishop of
Wimbledon”--or, for variation--“his father was once rector of Christ
Church, Mayfair.”

There was a thin, hard, literary lady present, of the obviously and
militantly virgin type. She was at the foot of the table, next to the
count, but we fell into a discussion of the English woman’s-suffrage
activity under his very nose, the while he talked lightly to Barfleur.
She was for more freedom for women, politically and otherwise, in order
that they might accomplish certain social reforms. You know the type.
How like a sympathetic actress, I thought, to pick a lady of this
character to associate with! One always finds these opposing types
together.

The thing that interested me was to see this charming little actress
keeping up as smart a social form as her means would permit and still
hoping after years of effort and considerable success to be taken up
and made much of. She could not have been made to believe that society,
in its last reaches, is composed of dullness and heaviness of soul,
which responds to no schools of the unconventional or the immoral and
knows neither flights of fancy nor delicacy and tenderness of emotion.

Individuals like Miss E. think, somehow, that if they achieve a certain
artistic success they will be admitted everywhere. Dear aspiring little
Miss E.! She could hardly have been persuaded that there are walls that
are never scaled by art. And morality, any more than immorality or
religion, has nothing to do with some other walls. Force is the thing.
And the ultimate art force she did not possess. If she had, she would
have been admitted to a certain interchange in certain fields. Society
is composed of slightly interchanging groups, some members of which
enter all, most members of which never venture beyond their immediate
individual circle. And only the most catholic minded and energetic
would attempt or care to bother with the labor of keeping in touch with
more than one single agreeable circle.

Another evening I went with Barfleur to call on two professional
critics, one working in the field of literature, the other in art
exclusively. I mention these two men and their labors because they were
very interesting to me, representing as they did two fields of artistic
livelihood in London and both making moderate incomes, not large, but
sufficient to live on in a simple way. They were men of mettle, as I
discovered, urgent, thinking types of mind, quarreling to a certain
extent with life and fate, and doing their best to read this very
curious riddle of existence.

These two men lived in charming, though small quarters, not far from
fashionable London, on the fringe of ultra-respectability, if not of
it. Mr. F. was a conservative man, thirty-two or thirty-three years
of age, pale, slender, remote, artistic. Mr. Tyne was in character
not unlike Mr. F., I should have said, though he was the older
man--artistic, remote, ostensibly cultivated, living and doing all the
refined things on principle more than anything else.

It amuses me now when I think of it, for of course neither of these
gentlemen cared for me in the least, beyond a mild curiosity as to what
I was like, but they were exceedingly pleasant. How did I like London?
What did I think of the English? How did London contrast with New York?
What were some of the things I had seen?

[Illustration: Hoped for the day when the issue might be tried out
physically]

I stated as succinctly as I could, that I was puzzled in my mind as to
what I did think, as I am generally by this phantasmagoria called
life, while Mr. Tyne served an opening glass of port and I toasted
my feet before a delicious grate-fire. Already, as I have indicated
in a way, I had decided that England was deficient in the vitality
which America now possesses--certainly deficient in the raw creative
imagination which is producing so many new things in America, but far
superior in what, for want of a better phrase, I must call social
organization as it relates to social and commercial interchange
generally. Something has developed in the English social consciousness
a sense of responsibility. I really think that the English climate has
had a great deal to do with this. It is so uniformly damp and cold
and raw that it has produced a sober-minded race. When subsequently
I encountered the climates of Paris, Rome and the Riviera I realized
quite clearly how impossible it would be to produce the English
temperament there. One can see the dark, moody, passionate temperament
of the Italian evolving to perfection under their brilliant skies. The
wine-like atmosphere of Paris speaks for itself. London is what it is,
and the Englishmen likewise, because of the climate in which they have
been reared.

I said something to this effect without calling forth much protest,
but when I ventured that the English might possibly be falling behind
in the world’s race and that other nations--such as the Germans and
the Americans--might rapidly be displacing them, I evoked a storm of
opposition. The sedate Mr. F. rose to this argument. It began at the
dinner-table and was continued in the general living-room later. He
scoffed at the suggestion that the Germans could possibly conquer
or displace England, and hoped for the day when the issue might be
tried out physically. Mr. Tyne good-humoredly spoke of the long way
America had to go before it could achieve any social importance even
within itself. It was a thrashing whirlpool of foreign elements. He
had recently been to the United States, and in one of the British
quarterlies then on the stands was a long estimate by him of America’s
weaknesses and potentialities. He poked fun at the careless, insulting
manners of the people, their love of show, their love of praise. No
Englishman, having tasted the comforts of civilized life in England,
could ever live happily in America. There was no such thing as a
serving class. He objected to American business methods as he had
encountered them, and I could see that he really disliked America. To
a certain extent he disliked me for being an American, and resented my
modest literary reputation for obtruding itself upon England. I enjoyed
these two men as exceedingly able combatants--men against whose wits I
could sharpen my own.

I mention them because, in a measure, they suggested the literary and
artistic atmosphere of London.




CHAPTER X

SOME MORE ABOUT LONDON


“London sings in my ears.” I remember writing this somewhere about
the fourth or fifth day of my stay. It was delicious, the sense of
novelty and wonder it gave me. I am one of those who have been raised
on Dickens and Thackeray and Lamb, but I must confess I found little to
corroborate the world of vague impressions I had formed. Novels are a
mere expression of temperament anyhow.

New York and America are all so new, so lustful of change. Here, in
these streets, when you walk out of a morning or an evening, you feel a
pleasing stability. London is not going to change under your very eyes.
You are not going to turn your back to find, on looking again, a whole
sky line effaced. The city is restful, naïve, in a way tender and sweet
like an old song. London is more fatalistic and therefore less hopeful
than New York.

One of the first things that impressed me, as I have said, was the
grayish tinge of smoke that was over everything--a faint haze--and
the next that as a city, street for street and square for square, it
was not so strident as New York or Chicago--not nearly so harsh. The
traffic was less noisy, the people more thoughtful and considerate, the
so-called rush, which characterizes New York, less foolish. There is
something rowdyish and ill-mannered about the street life of American
cities. This was not true here. It struck me as simple, sedate,
thoughtful, and I could only conclude that it sprang from a less
stirring atmosphere of opportunity. I fancy it is harder to get along
in London. People do not change from one thing to another so much. The
world there is more fixed in a pathetic routine, and people are more
conscious of their so-called “betters.” In so far as I could judge on
so short a notice, London seemed to me to represent a mood--a uniform,
aware, conservative state of being, neither brilliant nor gay anywhere,
though interesting always. About Piccadilly Circus, Trafalgar Square,
Leicester Square, Charing Cross, and the Strand I suppose the average
Londoner would insist that London is very gay; but I could not see it.
Certainly it was not gay as similar sections in New York are gay. It is
not in the Londoner himself to be so. He is solid, hard, phlegmatic,
a little dreary, like a certain type of rain-bird or Northern loon,
content to make the best of a rather dreary situation. I hope not, but
I felt it to be true.

I do not believe that it is given any writer to wholly suggest a
city. The mind is like a voracious fish--it would like to eat up all
the experiences and characteristics of a city or a nation, but this,
fortunately, is not possible. My own mind was busy pounding at the
gates of fact, but during all the while I was there I got but a little
way. I remember being struck with the nature of St. James’s Park
which was near my hotel, the great column to the Duke of Marlborough,
at the end of the street, the whirl of life in Trafalgar Square and
Piccadilly Circus which were both very near. The offices I visited
in various nearby streets interested me, and the storm of cabs which
whirled by all the corners of the region of my hotel. It was described
to me as the center of London; and I am quite sure it was--for clubs,
theaters, hotels, smart shops and the like were all here. The heavy
trading section was further east along the banks of the Thames, and
between that and Regent Street, where my little hotel was located, lay
the financial section, sprawling around St. Paul’s Cathedral and the
Bank of England. One could go out of this great central world easily
enough--but it was only, apparently, to get into minor centers such as
that about Victoria Station, Kensington, Paddington, Liverpool Street,
and the Elephant and Castle.

I may be mistaken, but London did not seem either so hard or foreign to
me as New York. I have lived in New York for years and years and yet I
do not feel that it is My city. One always feels in New York, for some
reason, as though he might be put out, or even thrown out. There is
such a perpetual and heavy invasion of the stranger. Here in London I
could not help feeling off-hand as though things were rather stable and
that I was welcome in the world’s great empire city on almost any basis
on which I wished myself taken. That sense of civility and courtesy to
which I have already so often referred was everywhere noticeable in
mail-men, policemen, clerks, servants. Alas, when I think of New York,
how its rudeness, in contrast, shocks me! At home I do not mind. With
all the others I endure it. Here in London for the first time in almost
any great city I really felt at home.

But the distances! and the various plexi of streets! and the endless
directions in which one could go! Lord! Lord! how they confounded me.
It may seem odd to make separate comment on something so thoroughly
involved with everything else in a trip of this kind as the streets
of London; but nevertheless they contrasted so strangely with those
of other cities I have seen that I am forced to comment on them. For
one thing, they are seldom straight for any distance and they change
their names as frequently and as unexpectedly as a thief. Bond Street
speedily becomes Old Bond Street or New Bond Street, according to the
direction in which you are going; and I never could see why the Strand
should turn into Fleet Street as it went along, and then into Ludgate
Hill, and then into Cannon Street. Neither could I understand why
Whitechapel Road should change to Mile End Road, but that is neither
here nor there. The thing that interested me about London was that it
was endless and that there were no high buildings--nothing over four
or five stories as a rule--though now and then you actually find
eight-and nine-story buildings--and that it was homey and simple
and sad in some respects. I remember thinking how gloomy were some
of the figures I saw trudging here and there in the smoke-grayed
streets and the open park spaces. I never saw such sickly, shabby,
run-down-at-the-heels, decayed figures in all my life--figures from
which all sap and juice and the freshness of youth and even manhood
had long since departed. Men and women they were who seemed to emerge
out of gutters and cellars where could be neither light nor freshness
nor any sense of hope or care, but only eloquent misery. “Merciful
heaven!” I said to myself more than once, “is this the figure of a
man?” That is what life does to some of us. It drains us as dry as
the sickled wheat stalks and leaves us to blow in wintry winds. Or
it poisons us and allows us to fester and decay within our own skins.

But mostly I have separate, vivid pictures of London--individual
things that I saw, idle, pointless things that I did, which cheer and
amuse and please me even now whenever I think of them. Thus I recall
venturing one noon into one of the Lyons restaurants just above Regent
Street in Piccadilly and being struck with the size and importance of
it even though it was intensely middle class. It was a great chamber,
decorated after the fashion of a palace ball-room, with immense
chandeliers of prismed glass hanging from the ceiling, and a balcony
furnished in cream and gold where other tables were set, and where a
large stringed orchestra played continuously during lunch and dinner.
An enormous crowd of very commonplace people were there--clerks,
minor officials, clergymen, small shop-keepers--and the bill of fare
was composed of many homely dishes such as beef-and-kidney pie, suet
pudding, and the like--combined with others bearing high-sounding
French names. I mention this Lyons restaurant because there were
several quite like it, and because it catered to an element not reached
in quite the same way in America. In spite of the lifted eyebrows with
which Barfleur greeted my announcement that I had been there, the food
was excellent; and the service, while a little slow for a place of
popular patronage, was good. I recall being amused by the tall, thin,
solemn English head-waiters in frock coats, leading the exceedingly
_bourgeois_ customers to their tables. The English curate with his
shovel hat was here in evidence and the minor clerk. I found great
pleasure in studying this world, listening to the music, and thinking
of the vast ramifications of London which it represented; for every
institution of this kind represents a perfect world of people.

Another afternoon I went to the new Roman Catholic Cathedral in
Westminster to hear a fourteenth-century chant which was given between
two and three by a company of monks who were attached to the church. In
the foggy London atmosphere a church of this size takes on great gloom,
and the sound of these voices rolling about in it was very impressive.
Religion seems of so little avail these days, however, that I wondered
why money should be invested in any such structure or liturgy. Or why
able-bodied, evidently material-minded men should concern themselves
with any such procedure. There were scarcely a half-dozen people
present, if so many; and yet this vast edifice echoes every day at
this hour with these voices--a company of twenty or thirty fat monks
who seemingly might be engaged in something better. Of religion--the
spirit as opposed to the form--one might well guess that there was
little.

From the cathedral I took a taxi, and bustling down Victoria Street,
past the Houses of Parliament and into the Strand, came eventually to
St. Paul’s. Although it was only four o’clock, this huge structure
was growing dusky, and the tombs of Wellington and Marlborough were
already dim. The organist allowed me to sit in the choir stalls with
the choristers--a company of boys who entered, after a time, headed
by deacons and sub-deacons and possibly a canon. A solitary circle of
electric bulbs flamed gloomily overhead. By the light of this we were
able to make out the liturgy covering this service--the psalms and
prayers which swept sonorously through the building. As in the Roman
Catholic Cathedral, I was impressed with the darkness and space and
also, though not so much for some reason (temperamental inclination
perhaps), with the futility of the procedure. There are some eight
million people in London, but there were only twenty-five or thirty
here, and I was told that this service was never much more popular. On
occasions the church is full enough--full to overflowing--but not at
this time of day. The best that I could say for it was that it had a
lovely, artistic import which ought to be encouraged; and no doubt it
is so viewed by those in authority. As a spectacle seen from the Thames
or other sections of the city, the dome of St. Paul’s is impressive,
and as an example of English architecture it is dignified--though in my
judgment not to be compared with either Canterbury or Salisbury. But
the interesting company of noble dead, the fact that the public now
looks upon it as a national mausoleum and that it is a monument to the
genius of Christopher Wren, makes it worth while. Compared with other
cathedrals I saw, its chief charm was its individuality. In actual
beauty it is greatly surpassed by the pure Gothic or Byzantine or Greek
examples of other cities.

One evening I went with a friend of mine to visit the House of
Parliament, that noble pile of buildings on the banks of the Thames.
For days I had been skirting about them, interested in other things.
The clock-tower, with its great round clock-face,--twenty-three feet
in diameter, some one told me,--had been staring me in the face over
a stretch of park space and intervening buildings on such evenings as
Parliament was in session, and I frequently debated with myself whether
I should trouble to go or not, even if some one invited me. I grow so
weary of standard, completed things at times! However, I did go. It
came about through the Hon. T. P. O’Connor, M.P., an old admirer of
“Sister Carrie,” who, hearing that I was in London, invited me. He had
just finished reading “Jennie Gerhardt” the night I met him, and I
shall never forget the kindly glow of his face as, on meeting me in the
dining-room of the House of Commons, he exclaimed:

“Ah, the biographer of that poor girl! And how charming she was, too!
Ah me! Ah me!”

I can hear the soft brogue in his voice yet, and see the gay romance of
his Irish eye. Are not the Irish all in-born cavaliers, anyhow?

I had been out in various poor sections of the city all day,
speculating on that shabby mass that have nothing, know nothing,
dream nothing; or do they? It was most depressing, as dark fell, to
return through long, humble streets alive with a home-hurrying mass of
people--clouds of people not knowing whence they came or why. And now I
was to return and go to dine where the laws are made for all England.

I was escorted by another friend, a Mr. M., since dead, who was, when
I reached the hotel, quite disturbed lest we be late. I like the man
who takes society and social forms seriously, though I would not be
that man for all the world. M. was one such. He was, if you please, a
stickler for law and order. The Houses of Parliament and the repute
of the Hon. T. P. O’Connor meant much to him. I can see O’Connor’s
friendly, comprehensive eye understanding it all--understanding in his
deep, literary way why it should be so.

As I hurried through Westminster Hall, the great general entrance, once
itself the ancient Parliament of England, the scene of the deposition
of Edward II, of the condemnation of Charles I, of the trial of
Warren Hastings, and the poling of the exhumed head of Cromwell, I
was thinking, thinking, thinking. What is a place like this, anyhow,
but a fanfare of names? If you know history, the long, strange tangle
of steps or actions by which life ambles crab-wise from nothing to
nothing, you know that it is little more than this. The present places
are the thing, the present forms, salaries, benefices, and that dream
of the mind which makes it all into something. As I walked through into
Central Hall, where we had to wait until Mr. O’Connor was found, I
studied the high, groined arches, the Gothic walls, the graven figures
of the general anteroom. It was all rich, gilded, dark, lovely. And
about me was a room full of men all titillating with a sense of their
own importance--commoners, lords possibly, call-boys, ushers, and
here and there persons crying of “Division! Division!” while a bell
somewhere clanged raucously.

“There’s a vote on,” observed Mr. M. “Perhaps they won’t find him right
away. Never mind; he’ll come.”

He did come finally, with, after his first greetings, a “Well, now
we’ll ate, drink, and be merry,” and then we went in.

At table, being an old member of Parliament, he explained many things
swiftly and interestingly, how the buildings were arranged, the number
of members, the procedure, and the like. He was, he told me, a member
from Liverpool, which, by the way, returns some Irish members, which
struck me as rather strange for an English city.

“Not at all, not at all. The English like the Irish--at times,” he
added softly.

“I have just been out in your East End,” I said, “trying to find
out how tragic London is, and I think my mood has made me a little
color-blind. It’s rather a dreary world, I should say, and I often
wonder whether law-making ever helps these people.”

He smiled that genial, equivocal, sophisticated smile of the Irish that
always bespeaks the bland acceptance of things as they are, and tries
to make the best of a bad mess.

“Yes, it’s bad,”--and nothing could possibly suggest the aroma of a
brogue that went with this,--“but it’s no worse than some of your
American cities--Lawrence, Lowell, Fall River.” (Trust the Irish to
hand you an intellectual “You’re another!”) “Conditions in Pittsburgh
are as bad as anywhere, I think; but it’s true the East End is pretty
bad. You want to remember that it’s typical London winter weather
we’re having, and London smoke makes those gray buildings look rather
forlorn, it’s true. But there’s some comfort there, as there is
everywhere. My old Irish father was one for thinking that we all have
our rewards here or hereafter. Perhaps theirs is to be hereafter.” And
he rolled his eyes humorously and sanctimoniously heavenward.

An able man this, full, as I knew, from reading his weekly and his
books, of a deep, kindly understanding of life, but one who, despite
his knowledge of the tragedies of existence, refused to be cast down.

He was going up the Nile shortly in a house-boat with a party of
wealthy friends, and he told me that Lloyd George, the champion of
the poor, was just making off for a winter outing on the Riviera, but
that I might, if I would come some morning, have breakfast with him.
He was sure that the great commoner would be glad to see me. He wanted
me to call at his rooms, his London official offices, as it were, at 5
Morpeth Mansions, and have a pleasant talk with him, which latterly I
did.

While he was in the midst of it, the call of “Division!” sounded
once more through the halls, and he ran to take his place with
his fellow-parliamentarians on some question of presumably vital
importance. I can see him bustling away in his long frock coat, his
napkin in his hand, ready to be counted yea or nay, as the case might
be.

Afterwards when he had outlined for me a tour in Ireland which I must
sometime take, he took us up into the members’ gallery of the Commons
in order to see how wonderful it was, and we sat as solemn as owls,
contemplating the rather interesting scene below. I cannot say that I
was seriously impressed. The Hall of Commons, I thought, was small and
stuffy, not so large as the House of Representatives at Washington, by
any means.

In delicious Irish whispers he explained a little concerning the
arrangement of the place. The seat of the speaker was at the north end
of the chamber on a straight line with the sacred wool sack of the
House of Lords in another part of the building, however important that
may be. If I would look under the rather shadowy canopy at the north
end of this extremely square chamber, I would see him, “smothering
under an immense white wig,” he explained. In front of the canopy was a
table, the speaker’s table, with presumably the speaker’s official mace
lying upon it. To the right of the speaker were the recognized seats of
the government party, the ministers occupying the front bench. And then
he pointed out to me Mr. Lloyd George, Mr. Bonar Law (Unionist member
and leader of the opposition), and Mr. Winston Churchill, all men
creating a great stir at the time. They were whispering and smiling in
genial concert, while opposite them, on the left hand of the speaker,
where the opposition was gathered, some droning M. P. from the North,
I understood, a noble lord, was delivering one of those typically
intellectual commentaries in which the British are fond of indulging. I
could not see him from where I sat, but I could see him just the same.
I knew that he was standing very straight, in the most suitable clothes
for the occasion, his linen immaculate, one hand poised gracefully,
ready to emphasize some rather obscure point, while he stated in the
best English why this and this must be done. Every now and then, at a
suitable point in his argument, some friendly and equally intelligent
member would give voice to a soothing “Hyah! hyah!” or “Rathah!” Of
the four hundred and seventy-six provided seats, I fancy something
like over four hundred were vacant, their occupants being out in the
dining-rooms, or off in those adjoining chambers where parliamentarians
confer during hours that are not pressing, and where they are sought at
the call for a division. I do not presume, however, that they were all
in any so safe or sane places. I mock-reproachfully asked Mr. O’Connor
why he was not in his seat, and he said in good Irish:

“Me boy, there are thricks in every thrade. I’ll be there whin me vote
is wanted.”

We came away finally through long, floreated passages and towering
rooms, where I paused to admire the intricate woodwork, the splendid
gilding, and the tier upon tier of carven kings and queens in their
respective niches. There was for me a flavor of great romance over it
all. I could not help thinking that, pointless as it all might be,
such joys and glories as we have are thus compounded. Out of the dull
blatherings of half-articulate members, the maunderings of dreamers and
schemers, come such laws and such policies as best express the moods of
the time--of the British or any other empire. I have no great faith in
laws. To me, they are ill-fitting garments at best, traps and mental
catch-polls for the unwary only. But I thought as I came out into the
swirling city again, “It is a strange world. These clock-towers and
halls will sometime fall into decay. The dome of our own capital will
be rent and broken, and through its ragged interstices will fall the
pallor of the moon.” But life does not depend upon parliaments or men.




CHAPTER XI

THE THAMES


As pleasing hours as any that I spent in London were connected with
the Thames--a murky little stream above London Bridge, compared with
such vast bodies as the Hudson and the Mississippi, but utterly
delightful. I saw it on several occasions,--once in a driving rain
off London Bridge, where twenty thousand vehicles were passing in the
hour, it was said; once afterward at night when the boats below were
faint, wind-driven lights and the crowd on the bridge black shadows.
I followed it in the rain from Blackfriars Bridge, to the giant plant
of the General Electric Company at Chelsea one afternoon, and thought
of Sir Thomas More, and Henry VIII, who married Anne Boleyn at the Old
Church near Battersea Bridge, and wondered what they would think of
this modern powerhouse. What a change from Henry VIII and Sir Thomas
More to vast, whirling electric dynamos and a London subway system!

Another afternoon, bleak and rainy, I reconnoitered the section
lying between Blackfriars Bridge and Tower Bridge and found it very
interesting from a human, to say nothing of a river, point of view; I
question whether in some ways it is not the most interesting region in
London, though it gives only occasional glimpses of the river. London
is curious. It is very modern in spots. It is too much like New York
and Chicago and Philadelphia and Boston; but here between Blackfriars
Bridge and the Tower, along Upper and Lower Thames Street, I found
something that delighted me. It smacked of Dickens, of Charles II,
of Old England, and of a great many forgotten, far-off things which
I felt, but could not readily call to mind. It was delicious, this
narrow, winding street, with high walls,--high because the street was
so narrow,--and alive with people bobbing along under umbrellas or
walking stodgily in the rain. Lights were burning in all the stores
and warehouses, dark recesses running back to the restless tide of the
Thames, and they were full of an industrious commercial life.

It was interesting to me to think that I was in the center of so much
that was old, but for the exact details I confess I cared little. Here
the Thames was especially delightful. It presented such odd vistas.
I watched the tumbling tide of water, whipped by gusty wind where
moderate-sized tugs and tows were going by in the mist and rain. It
was delicious, artistic, far more significant than quiescence and
sunlight could have made it. I took note of the houses, the doorways,
the quaint, winding passages, but for the color and charm they did
not compare with the nebulous, indescribable mass of working boys and
girls and men and women which moved before my gaze. The mouths of many
of them were weak, their noses snub, their eyes squint, their chins
undershot, their ears stub, their chests flat. Most of them had a waxy,
meaty look, but for interest they were incomparable. American working
crowds may be much more chipper, but not more interesting. I could not
weary of looking at them.

[Illustration: Here the Thames was especially delightful]

Lastly I followed the river once more all the way from Cleopatra’s
Needle to Chelsea one heavily downpouring afternoon and found its
mood varying splendidly though never once was it anything more than
black-gray, changing at times from a pale or almost sunlit yellow to
a solid leaden-black hue. It looked at times as though something
remarkable were about to happen, so weirdly greenish-yellow was the
sky above the water; and the tall chimneys of Lambeth over the way,
appearing and disappearing in the mist, were irresistible. There is
a certain kind of barge which plies up and down the Thames with a
collapsible mast and sail which looks for all the world like something
off the Nile. These boats harmonize with the smoke and the gray, lowery
skies. I was never weary of looking at them in the changing light and
mist and rain. Gulls skimmed over the water here very freely all the
way from Blackfriars to Battersea, and along the Embankment they sat in
scores, solemnly cogitating the state of the weather, perhaps. I was
delighted with the picture they made in places, greedy, wide-winged,
artistic things.

Finally I had a novel experience with these same gulls one Sunday
afternoon. I had been out all morning reconnoitering strange sections
of London, and arrived near Blackfriars Bridge about one o’clock. I
was attracted by what seemed to me at first glance thousands of gulls,
lovely clouds of them, swirling about the heads of several different
men at various points along the wall. It was too beautiful to miss. It
reminded me of the gulls about the steamer at Fishguard. I drew near.
The first man I saw was feeding them minnows out of a small box he had
purchased for a penny, throwing the tiny fish aloft in the air and
letting the gulls dive for them. They ate from his hand, circled above
and about his head, walked on the wall before him, their jade bills and
salmon-pink feet showing delightfully.

I was delighted, and hurried to the second. It was the same. I found
the vender of small minnows near by, a man who sold them for this
purpose, and purchased a few boxes. Instantly I became the center of
another swirling cloud, wheeling and squeaking in hungry anticipation.
It was a great sight. Finally I threw out the last minnows, tossing
them all high in the air, and seeing not one escape, while I meditated
on the speed of these birds, which, while scarcely moving a wing, rise
and fall with incredible swiftness. It is a matter of gliding up and
down with them. I left, my head full of birds, the Thames forever fixed
in mind.

I went one morning in search of the Tower, and coming into the
neighborhood of Eastcheap witnessed that peculiar scene which concerns
fish. Fish dealers, or at least their hirelings, always look as though
they had never known a bath and are covered with slime and scales, and
here, they wore a peculiar kind of rubber hat on which tubs or pans of
fish could be carried. The hats were quite flat and round and reminded
me of a smashed “stovepipe” as the silk hat has been derisively called.
The peasant habit of carrying bundles on the head was here demonstrated
to be a common characteristic of London.

On another morning I visited Pimlico and the neighborhood of Vincent
Square. I was delighted with the jumble of life I found there,
particularly in Strutton Ground and Churton Street. Horse Ferry Road
touched me as a name and Lupus Street was strangely suggestive of a
hospital, not a wolf.

It was here that I encountered my first coster cart, drawn by the
tiniest little donkey you ever saw, his ears standing up most nobly and
his eyes suggesting the mellow philosophy of indifference. The load he
hauled, spread out on a large table-like rack and arranged neatly in
baskets, consisted of vegetables--potatoes, tomatoes, cabbage, lettuce
and the like. A bawling merchant or peddler followed in the wake of
the cart, calling out his wares. He was not arrayed in coster uniform,
however, as it has been pictured in America. I was delighted to listen
to the cockney accent in Strutton Ground where “’Ere you are, Lydy,”
could be constantly heard, and “Foine potytoes these ’ere, Madam,
hextra noice.”

In Earl Street I found an old cab-yard, now turned into a garage, where
the remnants of a church tower were visible, tucked away among the
jumble of other things. I did my best to discover of what it had been a
part. No one knew. The ex-cabman, now dolefully washing the wheels of
an automobile, informed me that he had “only been workin’ ’ere a little
wile,” and the foreman could not remember. But it suggested a very
ancient English world--as early as the Normans. Just beyond this again
I found the saddest little chapel--part of an abandoned machine-shop,
with a small hand-bell over the door which was rung by means of a piece
of common binding-twine! Who could possibly hear it, I reflected.
Inside was a wee chapel, filled with benches constructed of store boxes
and provided with an altar where some form of services was conducted.
There was no one to guard the shabby belongings of the place and I sat
down and meditated at length on the curiosity of the religious ideal.

In another section of the city where I walked--Hammersmith--and still
another--Seven Kings--I found conditions which I thought approximated
those in the Bronx, New York, in Brooklyn, in Chicago and elsewhere.
I could not see any difference between the lines of store-front
apartment houses in Seven Kings and Hammersmith and Shepherd’s Bush
for that matter, and those in Flatbush, Brooklyn or the South End of
Philadelphia. You saw the difference when you looked at the people and,
if you entered a tavern, America was gone on the instant. The barmaid
settled that and the peculiar type of idler found here. I recall in
Seven Kings being entertained by the appearance of the working-men
assembled, their trousers strapped about the knees, their hats or
caps pulled jauntily awry. Always the English accent was strong and,
at times, here in London, it became unintelligible to me. They have a
lingo of their own. In the main I could make it out, allowing for the
appearance or disappearance of “h’s” at the most unexpected moments.

The street cars in the outlying sections are quite the same as in
America and the variety of stores about as large and bright. In
the older portions, however, the twisting streets, the presence of
the omnibus in great numbers, and of the taxi-stands at the more
frequented corners, the peculiar uniforms of policemen, mail-men,
street-sweepers (dressed like Tyrolese mountaineers), messenger-boys,
and the varied accoutrements of the soldiery gave the great city
an individuality which caused me to realize clearly that I was far
from home--a stranger in a strange land. As charming as any of the
spectacles I witnessed were the Scotch soldiers in bare legs, kilts,
plaid and the like swinging along with a heavy stride like Norman
horses or--singly--making love to a cockney English girl on a ’bus top
perhaps. The English craze for pantomime was another thing that engaged
my curious attention and why any reference to a mystic and presumably
humorous character known as “Dirty Dick” should evoke such volumes of
applause.




CHAPTER XII

MARLOWE


After I had been at Bridgely Level four or five days Barfleur suggested
that I visit Marlowe, which was quite near by on the Thames, a place
which he said fairly represented the typical small country town of the
old school.

“You will see there something which is not so generally common now in
England as it was--a type of life which is changing greatly, I think;
and perhaps you had better see that now before you see much more.”

I promised to go and Barfleur gave positive instructions as to how this
was to be achieved. I was to say to the maid when I would be ready.
Promptly at that hour one of the boys was to come and escort me to some
point in the road where I could see Marlowe. From there I was to be
allowed to proceed alone.

“You won’t want to be bothered with any company, so just send him back.
You’ll find it very interesting.”

The afternoon had faired up so beautifully that I decided I must go
out of doors. I was sick of writing. I gave notice to Dora, the maid,
at luncheon that I should want one of the boys for a guide at three
o’clock, and at ten minutes of the hour Percy entered my room with the
air of a soldier.

“When shall you be ready for your walk to Marlowe?” he asked, in his
stately tone.

“In just ten minutes now.”

“And have you any objection to our walking to Marlowe with you?”

“Are there two of you?”

“Yes. My brother Charles and myself.”

“None whatever. Your father doesn’t mind, does he?”

“No, he doesn’t mind.”

So at three Percy and Charles appeared at the window. Their faces
were eager with anticipation and I went at once to get my cap and
coat. We struck out along a road between green grass, and although it
was December you would have thought it April or May. The atmosphere
was warm and tinged with the faintest, most delicate haze. A lovely
green moss, very fine, like powdered salt, was visible on the trunks
of the trees. Crows were in the air, and robins--an English robin is
a solemn-looking bird--on the lawns. I heaved a breath of delight,
for after days of rain and chill this burst of golden light was most
delicious.

On the way, as I was looking about, I was being called upon to answer
questions such as: “Are there any trees like these in Amáyreeka? Do you
have such fine weather in Amáyreeka? Are the roads as good as this in
Amáyreeka?”

“Quite as good as this,” I replied, referring to the one on which we
were walking, for it was a little muddy.

The way lay through a patch of nearly leafless trees, the ground strewn
thick with leaves, and the sun breaking in a golden shower through
the branches. I laughed for joy at being alive--the hour was so fine.
Presently, after going down a bank so steep that it was impossible not
to run if you attempted to walk fast, we came to an open field, the
west border of which was protected by a line of willows skirting the
banks of a flume which gave into the Thames somewhere. Below the small
bridge over which we passed was fastened a small punt, that quaint
little boat so common on the Thames. Beyond that was a very wide field,
fully twenty acres square, with a yellow path running diagonally
across it and at the end of this path was Marlowe.

In the meantime my young friends insisted on discussing the possibility
of war between America and England and I was kept busy assuring them
that England would not be able to do anything at all with the United
States. The United States was so vast, I said. It was full of such
smart people. While England was attempting to do something with its
giant navy, we should be buying or building wonderful ships and
inventing marvelous machines for destroying the enemy. It was useless
to plead with me as they did that England had a great army and we none.
“We can get one,” I insisted, “oh, a much vaster army than you could.”

“And then Can-ee-dah,” insisted Percy wisely, “while you would be
building your navy or drilling your army, we should be attacking you
through Can-ee-dah.”

“But Canada doesn’t like you,” I replied. “And besides it only has six
million people.”

He insisted that Canada was a great source and hope and I finally said:
“Now, I’ll tell you what I’ll do. You want England to whip the United
States, don’t you?”

“Yes,” echoed both Percy and Charles heartily.

“Very well, then for peace and quiet’s sake, I’ll agree that it can.
England can whip the United States both on sea and land. Now is that
satisfactory?”

“Yes,” they echoed, unanimously.

“Very well then,” I laughed. “It is agreed that the United States is
badly beaten everywhere and always by England. Isn’t Marlowe lovely?”
and fixed my interested gaze on the approaching village.

In the first glimpse of Marlowe some of the most joyous memories of my
childhood came back. I don’t know whether you as a boy or a girl loved
to look in your first reader at pictures of quaint little towns with
birds flying above belfries and gabled roofs standing free in some
clear, presumably golden air, but I did. And here, across this green
field lay a little town, the sweetness of which was most appealing. The
most prominent things were an arched bridge and a church, with a square
gray belfry, set in a green, tree-grown church-yard. I could see the
smooth surface of the Thames running beside it, and as I live, a flock
of birds in the sky.

“Are those rooks?” I asked of Percy, hoping for poetry’s sake that they
were.

“Rooks or crows,” he replied, “I don’t know which.”

“Are there rooks in Amáyreeka?”

“No--there are no rooks.”

“Ah, that’s something.”

I walked briskly because I wanted to reach this pretty scene while
the sun was still high, and in five minutes or so we were crossing
the bridge. I was intensely interested in the low gray stone houses,
with here and there a walk in front with a gate, and a very pretty
churchyard lying by the water, and the sylvan loveliness of the Thames
itself.

On the bridge I stopped and looked at the water. It was as smooth as
glass and tinged with the mellow light which the sun casts when it is
low in the west. There were some small boats anchored at a gate which
gave into some steps leading up to an inn--The Compleat Angler. On the
other side, back of the church was another inn--the Lion and Elk or
something like that--and below the bridge, more towards the west, an
old man in a punt, fishing. There was a very old man such as I have
often seen pictured in _Punch_ and the _Sketch_, sitting near the
support of the bridge, a short black pipe between his very wrinkled
lips. He was clad in thick greenish-brown clothes and heavy shoes and
a low flat hat some curate may have discarded. His eyes, which he
turned up at me as I passed, were small and shrewd, set in a withered,
wrinkled skin, and his hands were a collection of dried lines, like
wrinkled leather.

“There,” I thought, “is a type quite expressive of all England in its
rural form. Pictures of England have been teaching me that all my life.”

I went into the church, which was located on the site of one built
in the thirteenth century--and on the wall near the door was a
list of the resident vicars and their patrons, beginning with
some long-since-forgotten soul. The monks and the abbots of the
pre-Reformation period were indicated and the wars of the Reformation
also. I think that bridge which I had crossed had been destroyed by
Cromwell and rebuilt only sixty or seventy years before, but my memory
is not good and I will not guarantee these facts.

From the church we went out into the street and found an old stock
inside an iron fence, dating from some older day where they punished
people after that fashion. We came to a store which was signaled by
a low, small-paned window let into a solid gray wall, where were
chocolates and candies and foreign-manufactured goods with labels I had
never seen before. It is a strange sensation to go away from home and
leave all your own familiar patent medicines and candies and newspapers
and whiskies and journey to some place where they never saw or heard of
them.

Here was Marlowe, and lovely as it was, I kept saying to myself, “Yes,
yes, it is delicious, but how terrible it would be to live here! I
couldn’t. It’s a dead world. We have passed so far beyond this.” I
walked through the pretty streets as smooth and clean as though they
had been brushed and between rows of low, gray, winding houses which
curved in pretty lines, but for the life of me I could not help
swinging between the joy of art for that which is alive and the sorrow
for something that is gone and will never be, any more. Everything,
everything spoke to me of an older day. These houses--all of them were
lower than they need be, grayer than they need be, thicker, older,
sadder. I could not think of gas or electricity being used here,
although they were, or of bright broad windows, open plumbing, modern
street cars, a stock of modern, up-to-date goods, which I am sure they
contained. I was impressed by a grave silence which is apathetic to me
as nothing else--a profound peace. “I must get out of this,” I said to
myself, and yet I was almost hugging myself for joy at the same time.

I remember going into one courtyard where an inn might once have been
and finding in there a furniture shop, a tin shop, a store room of
some kind and a stable, all invisible from the street. Do you recall
Dickens’ description of busy inn scenes? You came into this one under
the chamber belonging to a house which was built over the entry way.
There was no one visible inside, though a man did cross the court
finally with a wheel spoke in his hand. One of the houses or shops had
a little circular cupola on it, quite white and pretty and surmounted
by a faded weather cock. “How lovely,” I said, “how lovely,” but I was
as sad as I could be.

In the stores in the main street were always small, many-paned windows.
There were no lights as yet and the rooms into which I peered and the
private doors gave glimpses of things which reminded me of the poorest,
most backward and desolate sections of our own country.

I saw an automobile here and there, not many, and some girls on
bicycles,--not very good looking. Say what you will, you could not find
an atmosphere like this in an American town, however small, unless
it had already been practically abandoned. It would not contain a
contented population of three or four hundred. Instead of saloons I saw
“wine and spirit merchants” and also “Mrs. Jane Sawyer, licensed wine
and spirit dealer.” The butcher shops were the most American things
I saw, because their ruddy goods were all displayed in front with
good lights behind, and the next best things were the candy stores.
Dressmakers, milliners, grocers, hardware stores, wine shops, anything
and everything--were apparently concealed by solid gray walls or at
best revealed by small-paned windows. In the fading afternoon I walked
about hunting for schools, some fine private houses, some sense of
modernness--but no--it was not there. I noticed that in two directions
the town came abruptly to an end, as though it had been cut off by a
knife, and smooth, open, green fields began. In the distance you could
see other towns standing out like the castellated walls of earlier
centuries--but here was an end, sharp, definite, final.

I saw at one place--the end of one of these streets and where the
country began--an old gray man in a shabby black coat bending to
adjust a yoke to his shoulders to the ends of which were attached two
buckets filled with water. He had been into a low, gray, one-story inn
entitled, “Ye Bank of England,” before which was set a bench and also a
stone hitching post. For all the world he looked like some old man in
Hardy, wending his fading, reflective way homeward. I said to myself
here--England is old; it is evening in England and they are tired.

I went back toward the heart of things along another street, but I
found after a time it was merely taking me to another outer corner of
the town. It was gray now, and I was saying to my young companions that
they must be hurrying on home--that I did not intend to go back so
soon. “Say I will not be home for dinner,” I told them, and they left
after a time, blessed with some modern chocolate which they craved very
much.

Before they left, however, we reconnoitered another street and this led
me past low, one-story houses, the like of which, I insist, can rarely
be duplicated in America. Do you recall the log cabin? In England it
is preserved in stone, block after block of it. It originated there.
The people, as I went along, seemed so thick and stolid and silent to
me. They were healthy enough, I thought, but they were raw, uncouth,
mirthless. There was not a suggestion of gaiety anywhere--not a single
burst of song. I heard no one whistling. A man came up behind us,
driving some cattle, and the oxen were quite upon me before I heard
them. But there were no loud cries. He was so ultra serious. I met a
man pushing a dilapidated baby carriage. He was a grinder of knives
and mender of tinware and this was his method of perambulating his
equipment. I met another man pushing a hand cart with some attenuated
remnants of furniture in it. “What is that?” I asked. “What is he?”

“Oh, he’s somebody who’s moving. He hasn’t a van, you know.”

Moving! Here was food for pathetic reflection.

I looked into low, dark doors where humble little tin and glass-bodied
lamps were beginning to flicker.

“Thank God, my life is different from this,” I said, and yet the pathos
and the beauty of this town was gripping me firmly. It was as sweet as
a lay out of Horace--as sad as Keats.

Before a butcher shop I saw a man trying to round up a small drove of
sheep. The grayish-yellow of their round wooly backs blended with the
twilight. They seemed to sense their impending doom, for they ran here
and there, poking their queer thin noses along the ground or in the air
and refusing to enter the low, gray entry way which gave into a cobbled
yard at the back where were located the deadly shambles they feared.
The farmer who was driving them wore a long black coat and he made no
sound, or scarcely any.

“Sooey!” he called softly--“Ssh,” as he ran here and there--this way
and that.

The butcher or his assistant came out and caught one sheep, possibly
the bell-wether, by the leg and hauled him backward into the yard.
Seeing this, the silly sheep, not recognizing the enforced leadership,
followed after. Could there be a more convincing commentary on the
probable manner in which the customs and forms of life have originated?

I walked out another long street, quite alone now in the dusk, and met
a man driving an ox, also evidently to market.

There was a school in session at one place, a boys’ school--low,
ancient in its exterior equipment and silent as I passed. It was
_out_, but there was no running--no hallooing. The boys were going
along chatting rather quietly in groups. I do not understand this.
The American temper is more ebullient. I went into one bar--Mrs.
Davidge’s--and found a low, dark room, with a very small grate fire
burning and a dark little bar where were some pewter mugs, some
pink-colored glasses and a small brass lamp with a reflector. Mrs.
Davidge must have served me herself, an old, slightly hunched lady in a
black dress and gray gingham apron. “Can this place do enough business
to support her?” I asked myself. There was no one in the shop while I
was there.

The charm of Marlowe to me was its extreme remoteness from the life I
had been witnessing in London and elsewhere. It was so simple. I had
seen a comfortable inn somewhere near the market place and this I was
idly seeking, entertaining myself with reflections the while. I passed
at one place a gas manufacturing plant which looked modern enough, in
so far as its tank was concerned, but not otherwise, and then up one
dark street under branches of large trees and between high brick walls,
in a low doorway, behind which a light was shining, saw a shovel-hatted
curate talking to an old woman in a shawl. All the rest was dark. At
another corner I saw a thin old man, really quite reverential looking,
with a peaked intelligent face, fine in its lines (like Calvin or Dante
or John Knox) and long thin white hair, who was pulling a vehicle--a
sort of revised baby carriage on which was, of all things, a phonograph
with a high flower-like tin horn. He stopped at one corner where some
children were playing in the dark and putting on a record ground out
a melody which I did not consider very gay or tuneful. The children
danced, but not, however, with the lightness of our American children.
The people here seemed either like this old man, sad and old and
peaked, with a fine intellectuality apparent, or thick and dull and red
and stodgy.

When I reached the market I saw a scene which something--some book or
pictures had suggested to me before. Solid women in shawls and flat,
shapeless wrecks of hats, and tall shambling men in queer long coats
and high boots--drovers they looked like--going to and fro. Children
were playing about and laborers were going home, talking a dialect
which I could not understand, except in part.

Five men came into the square and stood there under the central gas
lamp, with its two arms each with a light. One of them left the others
and began to sing in front of various doors. He sang and sang--“Annie
Laurie,” “Auld Lang Syne,” “Sally in our Alley,” in a queer nasal
voice, going in and coming out again, empty-handed I fancy. Finally he
came to me.

“Would you help us on our way?” he asked.

“Where are you going?” I inquired.

“We are way-faring workmen,” he replied simply, and I gave him some
coppers--those large English “tuppences” that annoyed me so much. He
went back to the others and they stood huddled in the square together
like sheep, conferring, but finally they went off together in the dark.

At the inn adjacent I expected to find an exceptional English scene of
some kind but I was more or less disappointed. It was homey but not so
different from old New England life. The room was large with an open
fire and a general table set with white linen and plates for a dozen
guests or more. A shambling boy in clothes much too big for him came
and took my order, turning up the one light and stirring the fire. I
called for a paper and read it and then I sat wondering whether the
food would be good or bad.

While I was waiting a second traveler arrived, a small, dapper,
sandy-haired person, with shrewd, fresh, inquisitive eyes--a
self-confident and yet clerkly man.

“Good evening,” he said, and I gave him the time of day. He bustled to
a little writing table nearby and sat down to write, calling for a pen,
paper, his slippers--I was rather puzzled by that demand--and various
other things. On sight this gentleman (I suppose the English would
abuse me for that word) looked anything but satisfactory. I suspected
he was Scotch and that he was cheap minded and narrow. Later something
about his manner and the healthy, brisk way in which, when his slippers
came, he took off his shoes and put them on--quite cheerful and
homelike--soothed me.

“He isn’t so bad,” I thought. “He’s probably a traveling salesman--the
English type. I’d better be genial, I may learn something.”

Soon the waiter returned (arrayed by this time, remarkable to relate,
in a dress suit the size of which was a piece of pure comedy in
itself), and brought the stranger toast and chops and tea. The latter
drew up to the other end of the table from me with quite an air of
appetite and satisfaction.

“They don’t usually put us fellows in with you,” he observed, stating
something the meaning of which I did not grasp for the moment. “Us
traveling men usually have a separate dining- and writing-room. Our
place seems to be shut up here to-night for some reason. I wouldn’t
have called for my slippers here if they had the other room open.”

“Oh, that’s quite all right,” I replied, gathering some odd class
distinction. “I prefer company to silence. You say you travel?”

“Yes, I’m connected with a house in London. I travel in the south of
England.”

“Tell me,” I said, “is this a typical English town from the point of
view of life and business, or is it the only one of its kind? It’s
rather curious to me.”

“It’s one of the poorest I know, certainly the poorest I stop at.
There is no life to speak of here at all. If you want to see a typical
English town where there’s more life and business you want to see
Canterbury or Maidenhead. No, no, you mustn’t judge England by this. I
suppose you’re traveling to see things. You’re not English, I see.”

“No, I’m from America. I come from New York.”

“I had a strong notion before I came to London to go to America after
I left school”--and to have heard him pronounce _school_ alone would
have settled his identity for those who know the Scotch. “Some of my
friends went there, but I decided not. I thought I’d try London instead
and I’m glad I did.”

“You like it?”

“Oh, yes, from a money point I do. I make perhaps fifty per cent. more
than I did in Scotland but I may say, too, it costs me almost fifty
per cent. more to live.” He said this with a sigh. I could see Scotch
thrift sticking out all over him. An interesting little man he proved,
very intelligent, very cautious, very saving. You could see early
religious training and keen desire to get up in the world in his every
gesture.

We fell into a most interesting conversation, to me, for knowing so
little of England I was anxious to know more. Despite the littleness of
my companion and his clerkly manner I found him entertaining. He wanted
to know what I thought of England and I told him--as much as I could
judge by a few days’ stay. He told me something of London life--its
streets, sections and so on and asked a great many questions about
America. He had the ability to listen intelligently which is a fine
sign. He wanted to know particularly what traveling salesmen receive
in America and how far their money goes. He was interested to know the
difference between English and American railroads. By this time the
meal had ended and we were toasting our toes before the fire. We were
quite friendly.

“It’s some little distance back to my place and I think I’ll be going,”
I said. “I don’t know whether I really know how to get there, but I’ll
try. I understand there is no direct railroad connection between here
and there. I may not be able to find my way at night as it is.”

“Well, I’ll walk with you a little way if you don’t mind,” he replied
solicitously. “I have nothing else to do.”

The idea of companionship soothed me. Walking around alone and standing
in the market place looking at the tramping men had given me the blues.
I felt particularly lonely at moments, being away from America, for the
difference in standards of taste and action, the difference in modes
of thought and practice, and the difference in money and the sound of
human voices was growing on me. When you have lived in one country all
your life and found yourself comfortable in all its ways and notions
and then suddenly find yourself out of it and trying to adjust yourself
to things that are different in a hundred little ways, it is rather
hard.

“That’s very nice of you. I’d like to have you,” and out we went,
paying our bills and looking into a misty night. The moon was up but
there was a fairly heavy fog and Marlowe looked sheeted and gray.
Because I stated I had not been in any of the public houses and was
interested to go, he volunteered to accompany me, though I could see
that this was against his principles.

“I don’t drink myself,” he observed, “but I will go in with you if you
want to. Here’s one.”

We entered and found a rather dimly lighted room,--gas with a mantle
over it,--set with small tables and chairs, and a short bar in one
corner. Mrs. Davidge’s bar had been short, too, only her room was
dingier and small. A middle-sized Englishman, rather stout, came out of
a rear door, opening from behind the bar, and asked us what we would
have. My friend asked for root beer. I noticed the unescapable open
fire and the array of pink and green and blue wine glasses. Also the
machinery for extracting beer and ale from kegs, a most brassy and
glowing sight. Our host sold cigars and there were boards about on the
tables for some simple games.

This and a half-dozen other places into which we ventured gave me the
true spirit of Marlowe’s common life. I recalled at once the vast
difference between this and the average American small town saloon. In
the latter (Heaven preserve us from it) the trade might be greater or
it might not, but the room would be larger, the bar larger, the flies,
dirt, odor, abominable. I hope I am not traducing a worthy class,
but the American saloon keeper of small town proclivities has always
had a kind of horror for me. The implements of his trade have always
been so scummy and ill-kept. The American place would be apt to be
gayer, rougher, noisier. I am thinking of places in towns of the same
size. Our host was no more like an American barkeeper than a bee is
like a hornet. He was a peaceful-looking man, homely, family marked,
decidedly dull. Your American country barkeeper is another sort, more
intelligent, perhaps, but less civil, less sensible and reliable
looking. The two places were miles apart in quality and feeling.
Here in Marlowe and elsewhere in England, wherever I had occasion to
inspect them, the public houses of the small-town type were a great
improvement over the American variety. They were clean and homelike and
cheerful. The array of brass, the fire, the small tables for games,
all pleased me. I took it to be a place more used as a country club
or meeting-house than as in our case a grimy, orgiastic resort. If
there were drunken men or women in any of the “pubs,” this night I
did not see them. My Scotch friend assured me that he believed them,
ordinarily, to be fairly respectable.

Not knowing my way through the woods adjacent and having spent much
time in this way I finally decided to take a train or conveyance of
some kind. But there was no train to be had for some time to come. The
trains there were did not run my way and no “fly” would convey me, as
one bar mistress informed me, because there was a hard hill to climb
and the rain which had fallen during the day had made the roads bad. I
began to meditate returning to the inn. Finally the lady observed, “I
can tell you how to get there, if you want to walk. It’s not more than
an hour and it is a perfectly good road all the way.” She drew with her
finger an outline of the twists of the road. “If you’re not afraid of a
few screech owls, there’s nothing to harm you. You go to the bridge up
here, cross it and take the first road to your left. When you come to a
culvert about a mile out you will find three roads dividing there. One
goes down the hollow to somewhere, I forgot the name; one goes up the
hill to Bridgely Level, it’s a bridle path; and one goes to the right.
It’s a smooth, even road--that’s the one you want.”

It was a lovely night. The moon overhead was clear and bright and the
fog gave the fields a white eerie look. As we walked, my friend regaled
me with what he said was a peculiar custom among English traveling
men. At all English inns there is what is known as the traveling men’s
club. The man who has been present at any inn on any stated occasion
for the greatest number of hours or days is _ipso facto_, president of
this club. The traveling man who has been there next longest if only
for ten minutes less than the first, or more than the third, is vice
president. Every inn serves what is known as the traveling man’s dinner
at twelve o’clock or thereabouts and he who is president by virtue of
the qualifications above described, is entitled to sit at the head of
the table and carve and serve the roast. The vice president, if there
be one, sits at the foot of the table and carves and serves the fowl.
When there are two or more traveling men present, enough to provide
a president and a vice president for this dinner, there is a regular
order of procedure to be observed. The president arriving takes his
seat first at the head of the table; the vice president then takes his
place at the foot of the table. The president, when the roast beef is
served, lifts the cover of the dish and says, “Mr. Vice President,
we have here, I see, some roast beef.” The vice president then lifts
the cover of his dish and says, “Mr. President we have here, I see,
some roast goose.” “Gentlemen,” then says the president, bowing to
the others present, “the dinner is for all,” and begins serving the
roast. The vice president later does his duty in turn. The next day in
all likelihood, the vice president or some other becomes president,
and so it goes. My little Scotchman was most interested in telling me
this, for it appealed to his fancy as it did to mine and I could see he
relished the honor of being president in his turn.

It was while he was telling this that we saw before us three paths, the
middle one and the one to the right going up through the dark woods,
the one to the left merely skirting the woods and keeping out in the
light.

“Let’s see, it’s the left you want, isn’t it?” he asked.

“No, it’s the right,” I replied.

“I think she said the left,” he cautioned. “Well, anyhow here’s a sign
post. You lift me up and I’ll read what it says.”

It wasn’t visible from the ground.

I caught him about the legs and hoisted him aloft and he peered closely
at all three signs. He was a dapper, light little man.

“You’re right,” he said.

We shook hands and wished each other luck. He struck off back along the
road he had come in the fog and I mounted musingly through the woods.
It was dark and delightfully odorous, the fog in the trees, struck by
the moonlight, looking like moving sheeted ghosts. I went on gaily
expecting to hear a screech owl but not one sounded. After perhaps
fifteen or twenty minutes of walking I came out into the open road and
then I found that I really did not know where Bridgely Level was after
all. There was no sign.

I went from house to house in the moonlight--it was after
midnight--rousing drowsy Englishmen who courteously gave me directions
and facing yowling dogs who stood in the open roadway and barked. I
had to push one barking guardian out of the way with my hands. All was
silent as a church yard. Finally I came to a family of Americans who
were newly locating for the winter not far from Bridgely Level and
they put me right. I recall the comment of the woman who opened the
door: “You’re an American, aren’t you?” and the interest she took in
being sure that I would find my way. When I finally reached my door I
paused in the garden to survey the fog-lined valley from which came the
distant bark of a dog.




CHAPTER XIII

LILLY: A GIRL OF THE STREETS


I stood one evening in Piccadilly, at the dinner hour, staring into
the bright shop windows. London’s display of haberdashery and gold and
silver ornaments interests me intensely. It was drizzling and I had no
umbrella; yet that situation soon ceases to annoy one in England. I
walked on into Regent Street and stopped under an arc light to watch
the home-surging crowds--the clerks, men and women, the boys and girls.

The thought was with me as I walked in the rain, “Where shall I dine?
How shall I do it?” I wandered through New Bond Street; and looking
idly at the dark stores, as I came back along Piccadilly, I saw two
girls, arm in arm, pass by. One of them looked over her shoulder at me
and smiled. She was of medium size and simply dressed. She was pretty
in the fresh English way, with large, too innocent eyes. The girls
paused before a shop window and as I stopped beside them and looked at
the girl who had smiled, she edged over toward me and I spoke to her.

“Wouldn’t you like to take the two of us?” she asked with that quaint
odd accent of the Welsh. Her voice was soft and her eyes were as blue
and weak in their force as any unsophisticated girl’s might well be.

“This girl isn’t hard and vulgar,” I said to myself. I suppose we all
pride ourselves on knowing something of character in women. I thought I
did.

“No,” I replied rather directly to her question. “Not to-night. But
let’s you and I go somewhere for dinner.”

“Would you mind givin’ my friend a shillin’?” she asked.

“Not at all,” I replied. “There you are.”

It was a wet night, chill and dreary, and on second thought I made
it half-a-crown. The second girl went away--a girl with a thin white
face--and I turned to my companion.

“Now,” I said, “what shall we do?” It was nearly eight o’clock and I
was wondering where I could go with such a girl to dine. Her clothes,
I perceived, were a mere patchwork. Her suit was of blue twill, worn
shiny. She wore the cheapest kind of a feather boa and her hat was
pathetic. But the color of her cheeks was that wonderful apple color
of the English and her eyes--really her eyes were quite a triumph of
nature--soft and deep blue, and not very self-protective.

“Poor little storm-blown soul,” I thought as I looked at her. “Your
life isn’t much. A vague, conscienceless thing (in the softer sense of
that word). You have a chilly future before you.”

She looked as though she might be nineteen.

“Let’s see! Have you had your dinner?” I asked.

“No, sir.”

“Where is there a good restaurant? Not too smart, you know.”

“Well, there’s L.’s Corner House.”

“Oh, yes, where is that? Do you go there yourself, occasionally?”

“Oh, yes, quite often. It’s very nice, I think.”

“We might go there,” I said. “Still, on second thought, I don’t think
we will just now. Where is the place you go to--the place you take
your--friends?”

“It’s at No. -- Great Titchfield Street.”

“Is that an apartment or a hotel?”

“It’s a flat, sir, my flat. The lady lets me bring my friends there. If
you like, though, we could go to a hotel. Perhaps it would be better.”

I could see that she was uncertain as to what I would think of her
apartment.

“And where is the hotel? Is that nice?”

“It’s pretty good, sir, not so bad.”

I smiled. She was holding a small umbrella over her head.

“We had better take a taxi and get out of this rain.”

I put up my hand and hailed one. We got in, the driver obviously
realizing that this was a street liaison, but giving no sign. London
taxi-drivers, like London policemen, are the pink of civility.

This girl was civil, obliging. I was contrasting her with the Broadway
and the American type generally--hard, cynical little animals. The
English, from prostitutes to queens, must have an innate sense of fair
play in the social relationship of live and let live. I say this in all
sincerity and with the utmost feeling of respect for the nation that
has produced it. They ought to rule, by right of courtesy. Alas, I fear
me greatly that the force and speed of the American, his disregard for
civility and the waste of time involved, will change all this.

In the taxi I did not touch her, though she moved over near to me in
that desire to play her rôle conscientiously line by line, scene by
scene.

“Have we far to go?” I asked perfunctorily.

“Not very, only a little way.”

“How much ought the cab charge to be?”

“Not more than eight or ten pence, sir.” Then, “Do you like girls,
sir?” she asked quaintly in a very human effort to be pleasant under
the circumstances.

“No,” I replied, lying cautiously.

She looked at me uncertainly--a little over-awed, I think. I was surely
a strange fish to swim into her net anyhow.

“Very likely you don’t like me then?”

“I am not sure that I do. How should I know? I never saw you before in
my life. I must say you have mighty nice eyes,” was my rather banal
reply.

“Do you think so?” She gave me a sidelong, speculative look.

“What nationality are you?” I asked.

“I’m Welsh,” she replied.

“I didn’t think you were English exactly. Your tone is softer.”

The taxi stopped abruptly and we got out. It was a shabby-looking
building with a tea- or coffee-room on the ground floor, divided into
small rooms separated by thin, cheap, wooden partitions. The woman
who came to change me a half sovereign in order that I might pay the
driver, was French, small and cleanly looking. She was pleasant and
brisk and her whole attitude reassured me at once. She did not look
like a person who would conspire to rob, and I had good reason to think
more clearly of this as we came out later.

“This way,” said my street girl, “we go up here.”

And I followed her up two flights of thinly carpeted stairs into a
small dingy room. It was clean, after the French fashion.

“It’s not so bad?” she asked with a touch of pride.

“No. Not at all.”

“Will you pay for the room, please?”

The landlady had followed and was standing by.

I asked how much and found I was to be charged five shillings which
seemed a modest sum.

The girl locked the door, as the landlady went out, and began taking
off her hat and jacket. She stood before me with half-challenging,
half-speculative eyes. She was a slim, graceful, shabby figure and a
note of pathos came out unexpectedly in a little air of bravado as she
rested one hand on her hip and smiled at me. I was standing in front of
the mantelpiece, below which was the grate ready to be fired. The girl
stood beside me and watched and plainly wondered. She was beginning
to suspect that I was not there on the usual errand. Her eyes, so
curiously soft and blue, began to irritate me. Her hair I noticed was
brown but coarse and dusty--not well kept. These poor little creatures
know absolutely nothing of the art of living or fascination. They are
the shabbiest pawns in life, mere husks of beauty and living on husks.

“Sit down, please,” I said. She obeyed like a child. “So you’re Welsh.
What part of Wales do you come from?”

She told me some outlandish name.

“What were your parents? Poor, I suppose.”

“Indeed not,” she bridled with that quaint country accent. “My father
was a grocer. He had three stores.”

“I don’t believe it,” I said mockingly. “You women lie so. I don’t
believe you’re telling me the truth.”

It was brutal, but I wanted to get beneath the conventional lies these
girls tell, if I could.

“Why not?” Her clear eyes looked into mine.

“Oh, I don’t. You don’t look to me like the daughter of a man who owned
three grocery stores. That would mean he was well-to-do. You don’t
expect me to believe that, with you leading this life in London?”

She bristled vaguely but without force.

“Believe it or not,” she said sullenly. “It’s so.”

“Tell me,” I said, “how much can you make out of this business?”

“Oh, sometimes more, sometimes less. I don’t walk every day. You know
I only walk when I have to. If I pick up a gentleman and if he gives me
a good lot I don’t walk very soon again--not until that’s gone. I--I
don’t like to very much.”

“What do you call a good lot?”

“Oh, all sorts of sums. I have been given as high as six pounds.”

“That isn’t true,” I said. “You know it isn’t true. You’re talking for
effect.”

The girl’s face flushed.

“It is true. As I’m alive it’s true. It wasn’t in this very room, but
it was in this house. He was a rich American. He was from New York. All
Americans have money. And he was drunk.”

“Yes, all Americans may have money,” I smiled sardonically, “but they
don’t go round spending it on such as you in that way. You’re not worth
it.”

She looked at me, but no angry rage sprang to her eyes.

“It’s true just the same,” she said meekly. “You don’t like women, do
you?” she asked.

“No, not very much.”

“You’re a woman-hater. That’s what you are. I’ve seen such.”

“Not a woman-hater, no. Simply not very much interested in them.”

She was perplexed, uncertain. I began to repent of my boorishness and
recklessly lighted the fire (cost--one shilling). We drew up chairs
before it and I plied her with questions. She told me of the police
regulations which permit a woman to go with a man, if he speaks to
her first, without being arrested--not otherwise--and of the large
number of women who are in the business. Piccadilly is the great
walking-ground, I understood, after one o’clock in the morning;
Leicester Square and the regions adjacent, between seven and eleven.
There is another place in the East End--I don’t recall where--where the
poor Jews and others walk, but they are a dreadful lot, she assured
me. The girls are lucky if they get three shillings and they are poor
miserable drabs. I thought at the time, if she would look down on them,
what must they be?

Then, somehow, because the conversation was getting friendly, I fancy,
this little Welsh girl decided perhaps that I was not so severe as I
seemed. Experience had trained her to think constantly of how much
money she could extract from men--not the normal fee, there is little
more than a poor living in that, but extravagant sums which produce
fine clothes and jewels, according to their estimate of these things.
It is an old story. Other women had told her of their successes. Those
who know anything of women--the street type--know how often this is
tried. She told the customary story of the man who picked her up and,
having escorted her to her room, offered her a pound when three or
four pounds or a much larger sum even was expected. The result was, of
course, according to her, dreadful for the man. She created a great
scene, broke some pottery over his head, and caused a general uproar
in the house. It is an old trick. Your timid man hearing this and
being possibly a new or infrequent adventurer in this world, becomes
fearful of a scene. Many men are timid about bargaining with a woman
beforehand. It smacks too much of the brutal and evil and after all
there is a certain element of romance involved in these drabby liaisons
for the average man, even if there is none--_as there is none_--for the
woman. It is an old, sad, sickening, grim story to most of them and
men are fools, dogs, idiots, with rarely anything fine or interesting
in their eyes. When they see the least chance to betray one of them,
to browbeat and rob or overcharge him in any way and by any trick,
they are ready to do it. This girl, Lilly E----, had been schooled by
perhaps a hundred experienced advisers of the street as to how this was
done. I know this is so, for afterwards she told me of how other women
did it.

But to continue: “He laid a sovereign on the table and I went for him,”
she said.

I smiled, not so much in derision as amusement. The story did not fit
her. Obviously it was not so.

“Oh, no, you didn’t,” I replied. “You are telling me one of the oldest
stories of the trade. Now the truth is you are a silly little liar and
you think you are going to frighten me, by telling me this, into giving
you two or three pounds. You can save yourself the trouble. I don’t
intend to do it.”

I had every intention of giving her two or three if it suited my mood
later, but she was not to know this now.

My little Welsh girl was all at sea at once. Her powerless but really
sweet eyes showed it. Something hurt--the pathos of her courage and
endurance in the face of my contemptuous attitude. I had made fun of
her obvious little lies and railed at her transparent tricks.

“I’m a new experience in men,” I suggested.

“Men! I don’t want to know anything more about them,” she returned with
sudden fury. “I’m sick of them--the whole lot of them! If I could get
out of this I would. I wish I need never see another man!”

I did not doubt the sincerity of this outburst. But I affected not to
believe her.

“It’s true!” she insisted sullenly.

“You say that, but that’s talk. If you wanted to get out, you would.
Why don’t you get a job at something? You can work.”

“I don’t know any trade now and I’m too old to learn.”

“What nonsense! You’re not more than nineteen and you could do anything
you pleased. You won’t, though. You are like all the others. This is
the easy way. Come,” I said more gently, “put on your things and let’s
get out of this.”

Obediently and without a word she put on her coat and her bedraggled
hat and we turned to the door.

“Look here,” I said, “I haven’t meant to be unkind. And Heaven knows
I’ve no right to throw stones at you. We are all in a bad mess in this
world--you and I, and the rest. You don’t know what I’m talking about
and it doesn’t matter. And now let’s find a good quiet restaurant where
we can dine slowly and comfortably like two friends who have a lot to
talk over.”

In a moment she was all animation. The suggestion that I was going
to act toward her as though she were a lady was, according to her
standards, wildly unconventional.

“Well, you’re funny,” she replied, laughing; “you really are funny.”
And I could see that for once, in a long time, perhaps, the faintest
touch of romance had entered this sordid world for her.

As we came out, seeing that my attitude had changed so radically, she
asked, “Would you get me a box of cigarettes? I haven’t any change.”

“Surely,” I said, and we stepped into a tobacconist’s shop. From there
we took a taxi to L.’s Corner House, which she seemed to regard as
sufficiently luxurious; and from there--but I’ll tell this in detail.

“Tell me,” I said, after she had given the order, picking something
for herself and me; “you say you come from Wales. Tell me the name
of a typical mining-town which is nearer London than some of the
others--some place which is really poor and hard-worked.”

“Well, where I come from was pretty bad,” she ventured, giving me some
unpronounceable name. “The people haven’t got much to live on there.”

I wish you might have heard the peculiar purr of her accent.

“And how far is that?”

She gave me the hours from London and the railroad fare in shillings. I
think it was about three hours at most.

“And Cardiff’s pretty bad,” she added. “There’s lots of mines there.
Very deep ones, too. The people are poor there.”

“Have you ever been in a mine?”

“Yes, sir.”

I smiled at her civility, for in entering and leaving the room of the
house of assignation, she had helped me on and off with my overcoat,
quite as a servant might.

I learned a little about Wales through her--its ill-paid life--and then
we came back to London. How much did the average street girl really
make? I wanted to know. She couldn’t tell me and she was quite honest
about it.

“Some make more than others,” she said. “I’m not very good at it,” she
confessed. “I can’t make much. I don’t know how to get money out of
men.”

“I know you don’t,” I replied with real sympathy. “You’re not brazen
enough. Those eyes of yours are too soft. You shouldn’t lie though,
Lilly. You’re better than that. You ought to be in some other work,
worse luck.”

She didn’t answer, choosing to ignore my petty philosophic concern over
something of which I knew so little.

We talked of girls--the different kinds. Some were really very pretty,
some were not. Some had really nice figures, she said, you could see
it. Others were made up terribly and depended on their courage or
their audacity to trick money out of men--dissatisfied men. There
were regular places they haunted, Piccadilly being the best--the
only profitable place for her kind--and there were no houses of ill
repute--the police did not allow them.

“Yes, but that can’t be,” I said. “And the vice of London isn’t
concentrated in just this single spot.” The restaurant we were in--a
large but cheap affair--was quite a center, she said. “There must be
other places. All the women who do this sort of thing don’t come here.
Where do they go?”

“There’s another place along Cheapside.”

It appeared that there were certain places where the girls congregated
in this district--saloons or quasi-restaurants, where they could go
and wait for men to speak to them. They could wait twenty minutes at
a time and then if no one spoke to them they had to get up and leave,
but after twenty minutes or so they could come back again and try their
luck, which meant that they would have to buy another drink. Meantime
there were other places and they were always full of girls.

“You shall take me to that Cheapside place,” I suggested. “I will buy
you more cigarettes and a box of candy afterwards. I will pay you for
your time.”

She thought about her traveling companion whom she had agreed to meet
at eleven, and finally promised. The companion was to be left to her
fate.

While we dined we talked of men and the types they admired. Englishmen,
she thought, were usually attracted toward French girls and Americans
liked English girls, but the great trick was to get yourself up like
an American girl and speak her patois--imitate her slang, because she
was the most popular of all.

“Americans and English gentlemen”--she herself made that odd
distinction--“like the American girl. I’m sometimes taken for one,” she
informed me, “and this hat is like the American hats.”

It was. I smiled at the compliment, sordid as it may appear.

“Why do they like them?” I asked.

“Oh, the American girl is smarter. She walks quicker. She carries
herself better. That’s what the men tell me.”

“And you are able to deceive them?”

“Yes.”

“That’s interesting. Let me hear you talk like an American. How do you
do it?”

She pursed her lips for action. “Well, I guess I’ll have to go now,”
she began. It was not a very good imitation. “All Americans say ‘I
guess,’” she informed me.

“And what else?” I said.

“Oh, let me see.” She seemed lost for more. “You teach me some,” she
said. “I knew some other words, but I forget.”

For half an hour I coached her in American slang. She sat there
intensely interested while I drilled her simple memory and her lips
in these odd American phrases, and I confess I took a real delight in
teaching her. She seemed to think it would raise her market value. And
so in a way I was aiding and abetting vice. Poor little Lilly E----!
She will end soon enough.

At eleven we departed for the places where she said these women
congregated and then I saw what the London underworld of this kind was
like. I was told afterwards that it was fairly representative.

This little girl took me to a place on a corner very close to a
restaurant we were leaving--I should say two blocks. It was on the
second floor and was reached by a wide stairway, which gave into a
room like a circle surrounding the head of the stairs as a center. To
the left, as we came up, was a bar attended by four or five pretty
barmaids, and the room, quite small, was crowded with men and women.
The women, or girls rather, for I should say all ranged somewhere
between seventeen and twenty-six, were good looking in an ordinary way,
but they lacked the “go” of their American sisters.

The tables at which they were seated were ranged around the walls
and they were drinking solely to pay the house for allowing them
to sit there. Men were coming in and going out, as were the other
girls. Sometimes they came in or went out alone. At other times they
came in or went out in pairs. Waiters strolled to and fro, and the
etiquette of the situation seemed to demand that the women should buy
port wine--why, I don’t know. It was vile stuff, tasting as though
it were prepared of chemicals and I refused to touch it. I was shown
local detectives, girls who worked in pairs, and those lowest of all
creatures, the men who traffic in women. I learned now that London
closes all its restaurants, saloons, hotel bars and institutions of
this kind promptly at twelve-thirty, and then these women are turned
out on the streets.

“You should see Piccadilly around one o’clock in the morning,” my guide
had said to me a little while before, and now I understood. They were
all forced out into Piccadilly from everywhere.

It was rather a dismal thing sitting here, I must confess. The room
was lively enough, but this type of life is so vacant of soul. It is
precisely as though one stirred in straw and sawdust, expecting it
to be vigorous with the feel of growing life and freshness, such as
one finds in a stalk or tree. It is a world of dead ideals I should
say--or, better yet, a world in which ideals never had a chance
to grow. The women were the veriest birds of prey, cold, weary,
disillusioned, angry, dull, sad, perhaps; the men were victims of
carnal desire without the ability to understand how weary and disgusted
the women were who sought to satisfy them. No clear understanding of
life on either side; no suggestion of delicacy or romance. No subtlety
of lure or parade. Rather, coarse, hard bargaining in which robbery and
abuse and bitter recrimination play a sodden part. I know of nothing so
ghastly, so suggestive of a totally dead spirit, so bitter a comment on
life and love and youth and hope as a street girl’s weary, speculative,
commercial cry of--“Hello, sweetheart!”

From this first place we went to others--not so good, Lilly told me.

It is a poor world. I do not attempt to explain it. The man or woman
of bridled passion is much better off. As for those others, how much
are they themselves to blame? Circumstances have so large a part in
it. I think, all in all, it is a deadly hell-hole; and yet I know that
talking is not going to reform it. Life, in my judgment, does not
reform. The world is old. Passion in all classes is about the same. We
think this shabby world is worst because it is shabby. But is it? Isn’t
it merely that we are different--used to different things? I think so.

After buying her a large box of candy I hailed a taxi and took my
little girl home to her shabby room and left her. She was very gay. She
had been made quite a little of since we started from the region of
rented rooms. Her purse was now the richer by three pounds. Her opinion
had been asked, her advice taken, she had been allowed to order. I had
tried to make her feel that I admired her a little and that I was sorry
for her a little. At her door, in the rain, I told her I might use some
of this experience in a book sometime. She said, “Send me a copy of
your book. Will I be in it?”

“Yes.”

“Send it to me, will you?”

“If you’re here.”

“Oh, I’ll be here. I don’t move often.”

Poor little Welsh waif! I thought, how long, how long, will she be
“here” before she goes down before the grim shapes that lurk in her
dreary path--disease, despair, death?




CHAPTER XIV

LONDON; THE EAST END


As interesting as any days that I spent in London were two in the
East End, though I am sorry to add more drabby details to those just
narrated. All my life I had heard of this particular section as grim,
doleful, a center and sea of depraved and depressed life.

“Nothing like the East End of London,” I have heard people say, and
before I left I expected to look over it, of course. My desire to do
so was whetted by a conversation I had with the poet, John Masefield,
who, if I remember rightly, had once lived in the extreme East End of
London, Canningtown. He had talked of the curious physical condition
of the people which he described as “bluggy” or stagnant. Little
intelligence in the first place, according to him, seemed to be
breeding less and less intelligence as time went on. Poverty, lack
of wits, lack of ambition were fostering inbreeding. Such things are
easy to say. No one can really tell. Even more interesting to me was
the proffered information concerning East End amusements--calf-eating
contests, canary-singing contests, whiffet races, pigeon-eating
contests. I was told it would be hard to indicate how simple-minded the
people were in many things and yet how low and dark in their moods,
physical and moral. I got a suggestion of this some days later, when
I discovered in connection with the police courts that every little
while the court-room is cleared in order that terrible, unprintable,
almost unbearable testimony may be taken. What he said to me somehow
suggested the atmosphere of the Whitechapel murders--those demoniac
crimes that had thrilled the world a few years before.

I must confess that my first impression was one of disappointment.
America is strident and its typical “East Side” and slum conditions
are strident also. There is no voiceless degradation that I have ever
seen in America. The East Side of New York is unquestionably one of
the noisiest spots in the world, if not the worst. It is so full of
children--so full of hope too.

I was surprised to find how distinctly different are the two realms of
poverty in New York and London.

On my first visit I took the subway or tube to St. Mary’s Station,
Whitechapel, and getting out, investigated all that region which lies
between there and the Great Eastern Railway Station and Bethnal Green
and Shoreditch. I also reconnoitered Bethnal Green.

It was a chill, gray, January day. The London haze was gray and heavy,
quite depressing. Almost at once I noticed that this region which I was
in, instead of being strident and blatant as in America, was peculiarly
quiet. The houses, as in all parts of London, were exceedingly low, two
and three stories, with occasional four- and five-story buildings for
variation, but all built out of that drab, yellowish-gray brick which
when properly smoked has such a sad and yet effective air. The streets
were not narrow, as in New York’s East Side,--quite the contrary; but
the difference in crowds, color, noise, life, was astounding. In New
York the East Side streets, as I have said, are almost invariably
crowded. Here they were almost empty. The low doors and areaways
oozed occasional figures who were either thin, or shabby, or dirty,
or sickly, but a crowd was not visible anywhere. They seemed to me
to slink along in a half-hearted way and I, for one, experienced no
sense of desperado criminality of any kind--only a low despair. The
people looked too meek--too law-governed. The policeman must be an
immense power in London. Vice?--yes. Poverty?--yes. I saw young boys
and girls with bodies which seemed to me to be but half made up by
nature--half done. They were ambling, lackadaisical, weary-looking.
Low?--yes, in many cases. Filthy?--yes. Savage or dangerous?--not at
all. I noticed the large number of cheap cloth caps worn by the men
and boys and the large number of dull gray shawls wrapped slatternwise
about the shoulders of the women. This world looked sad enough in all
conscience, inexpressibly so, but because of the individual houses
in many instances, the clean streets and the dark tiny shops, not
unendurable--even homey in instances. I ventured to ask a stalwart
London policeman--they are all stalwart in London--“Where are the very
poor in the East End--the poorest there are?”

“Well, most of these people hereabouts have little enough to live on,”
he observed, looking straight before him with that charming soldierly
air the London policemen have--his black strap under his chin.

I walked long distances through such streets as Old Montague, King
Edward, Great Carden, Hope, Brick Lane, Salesworthy, Flower, Dean,
Hare, Fuller, Church Row, Cheshire, Hereford,--a long, long list, too
long to give here, coming out finally at St. John’s Catholic Church at
Bethnal Green and taking a car line for streets still farther out. I
had studied shops, doorways, areas, windows, with constant curiosity.
The only variation I saw to a dead level of sameness, unbroken by
trees, green places or handsome buildings of any kind, were factory
chimneys and endless charitable institutions covering, apparently,
every form of human weakness or deficiency, but looking as if they were
much drearier than the thing they were attempting to cure. One of them
I remember was an institution for the orphans of seamen, and another a
hospital for sick Spanish Jews. The lodging-houses for working-girls
and working-boys were so numerous as to be discouraging and so dreary
looking that I marveled that any boy or girl should endure to live in
them. One could sense all forms of abuse and distress here. It would
spring naturally out of so low a grade of intelligence. Only a Dickens,
guided by the lamp of genius, could get at the inward spirit of these,
and then perhaps it would not avail. Life, in its farthest reaches,
sinks to a sad ugly mess and stays there.

One of the places that I came upon in my perambulations was a public
washhouse, laundry and bath, established by the London County
Council, if I remember rightly, and this interested me greatly. It
was near Winchester Street and looked not unlike a low, one-story,
factory building. Since these things are always fair indications of
neighborhoods, I entered and asked permission to inspect it. I was
directed to the home or apartment of a small martinet of a director
or manager, quite spare and dark and cockney, who frowned on me
quizzically when he opened his door,--a perfect devil of a cheap
superior who was for putting me down with a black look. I could see
that it was one of the natives he was expecting to encounter.

“I would like to look over the laundry and baths,” I said.

“Where do you come from?” he asked.

“America,” I replied.

“Oh! Have you a card?”

I gave him one. He examined it as though by some chance it might reveal
something concerning me. Then he said if I would go round to the other
side he would admit me. I went and waited a considerable time before
he appeared. When he did, it was to lead me with a very uncertain air
first into the room filled with homely bath closets, where you were
charged a penny more or less--according to whether you had soap and
towel or not--and where the tubs were dreary affairs with damp-looking
wooden tops or flanges, and thence into the washroom and laundry-room,
where at this time in the afternoon--about four o’clock--perhaps a
score of women of the neighborhood were either washing or ironing.

Dreary! dreary! dreary! Ghastly! In Italy, later, and southern
France, I saw public washing under the sky, beside a stream or near a
fountain--a broken, picturesque, deliciously archaic fountain in one
instance. Here under gray skies, in a gray neighborhood, and in this
prison-like washroom was one of the most doleful pictures of life
the mind of man could imagine. Always when I think of the English, I
want to go off into some long analysis of their character. We have
so much to learn of life, it seems to me, and among the first things
is the chemistry of the human body. I always marvel at the nature of
the fluids which make up some people. Different climates must produce
different kinds, just as they produce strange kinds of trees and
animals. Here in England this damp, gray climate produces a muggy
sort of soul which you find _au naturel_ only when you walk among the
very poor in such a neighborhood as this. Here in this wash-house I
saw the low English _au naturel_, but no passing commentary such as
this could do them justice. One would have to write a book in order
to present the fine differences. Weakness, lowness of spirit, a vague
comprehension of only the simplest things, combined with a certain
meaty solidarity, gave me the creeps. Here they were, scrubbing or
ironing; strings tied around their protuberant stomachs to keep their
skirts up; clothes the color of lead or darker, and about as cheerful;
hair gray or brownish-black, thin, unkempt; all of them flabby and
weary-looking--about the atmosphere one would find in an American
poorhouse.

They washed here because there were no washing facilities in their own
homes--no stationary tubs, no hot or cold water, no suitable stoves to
boil water on. It was equally true of ironing facilities, the director
told me. They came from blocks away. Some women washed here for whole
vicinities--the more industrious ones. And yet few came here at
that--the more self-respecting stayed away. I learned this after a long
conversation with my guide whose principal commentary was that they
were a worthless lot and that you had to watch them all the time. “If
you don’t,” he said in cockney English, “they won’t keep things clean.
You can’t teach ’em scarcely how to do things right. Now and then they
gets their hands caught.” He was referring to the washing-drums and the
mangles. It was a long story, but all I got out of it was that this
was a dreary world, that he was sick of his position but compelled to
keep it for financial reasons, that he wanted as little as possible to
do with the kind of cattle which he considered these people to be and
that he would prefer to give it up. There was a touch of socialism in
all this--trying to do for the masses--but I argued that perhaps under
more general socialistic conditions things would be better; certainly,
one would have to secure more considerate feelings on the part of
directors and some public approval which would bring out the better
elements. Perhaps under truer socialism, however, public wash-houses
would not be necessary at all. Anyhow, the cry from here to Bond Street
and the Houses of Parliament and the stately world of the Lords seemed
infinitely far. What can society do with the sad, shadowy base on which
it rests?

I came another day to another section of this world, approaching
the East End via Aldgate and Commercial Road, and cutting through
to Bethnal Green via Stepney. I found the same conditions--clean
streets, low gray buildings, shabby people, a large museum whose chief
distinction was that the floor of its central rotunda had been laid by
women convicts!--and towering chimneys. So little life existed in the
streets, generally speaking, that I confess I was depressed. London
is so far flung. There were a great many Jews of Russian, Roumanian
and Slavic extraction, nearly all bearing the marks of poverty and
ignorance, but looking shrewd enough at that, and a great many
physically deteriorated English. The long-bearded Jew with trousers
sagging about his big feet, his small derby hat pulled low over his
ears, his hands folded tightly across his back, was as much in evidence
here as on the East Side in New York. I looked in vain for restaurants
or show places of any kind (saloons, moving pictures, etc.). There were
scarcely any here. This whole vicinity seemed to me to be given up to
the poorest kind of living--sad, drab, gray. No wonder the policeman
said to me: “Most of these people hereabouts have little enough to
live on.” I’m sure of it. Finally, after a third visit, I consulted
with another writer, a reputed authority on the East End, who gave me
a list of particular neighborhoods to look at. If anything exceptional
was to be detected from the appearance of the people, beyond what I
have noted, I could not see it. I found no poor East End costers with
buttons all over their clothes, although they once existed here. I
found no evidence of the overcrowded home life, because I could not get
into the houses to see. Children, it seemed to me, were not nearly so
numerous as in similar areas in American cities. Even a police-court
proceeding I saw in Avon Square was too dull to be interesting. I was
told I might expect the most startling crimes. The two hours I spent
in court developed only drunkenness and adultery. But as my English
literary guide informed me, only time and familiarity with a given
neighborhood would develop anything. I believe this. All I felt was
that in such a dull, sordid, poor-bodied world any depth of filth or
crime might be reached, but who cares to know?




CHAPTER XV

ENTER SIR SCORP


During all my stay at Bridgely Level I had been hearing more or
less--an occasional remark--of a certain Sir Scorp, an Irish knight
and art critic, a gentleman who had some of the finest Manets in the
world. He had given Dublin its only significant collection of modern
pictures--in fact, Ireland should be substituted for Dublin, and for
this he was knighted. He was the art representative of some great
museum in South Africa--at Johannesburg, I think,--and he was generally
looked upon as an authority in the matter of pictures.

Barfleur came one evening to my hotel with the announcement that Sir
Scorp was coming down to Bridgely Level to spend Saturday and Sunday,
that he would bring his car and that together on Sunday we three would
motor to Oxford. Barfleur had an uncle who was a very learned master of
Greek at that University and who, if we were quite nice and pleasant,
might give us luncheon. We were, I found, to take a little side trip on
Saturday afternoon to a place called Penn, some twenty or twenty-five
miles from Bridgely Level, in Buckinghamshire, whence William Penn had
come originally.

Saturday was rainy and gloomy and I doubted whether we should do
anything in such weather, but Barfleur was not easily put out. I wrote
all morning in my alcove, while Barfleur examined papers, and some
time after two Sir Scorp arrived,--a pale, slender, dark-eyed man of
thirty-five or thereabouts, with a keen, bird-like glance, a poised,
nervous, sensitive manner, and that elusive, subtlety of reference and
speech which makes the notable intellectual wherever you find him. For
the ten thousandth time in my life, where intellectuals are concerned,
I noticed that peculiarity of mind which will not brook equality save
under compulsion. Where are your credentials?--such minds invariably
seem to ask. How do you come to be what you think you are? Is there a
flaw in your intellectual or artistic armor? Let us see. So the duel of
ideas and forms and methods of procedure begins, and you are made or
unmade, in the momentary estimate of the individual, by your ability
to withstand criticism. I liked Sir Scorp as intellectuals go. I liked
his pale face, his trim black beard, his slim hands and his poised,
nervous, elusive manner.

“Oh, yes. So you’re new to England. I envy you your early impression. I
am reserving for the future the extreme pleasure of reading you.” These
little opening civilities always amuse me. We are all on the stage and
we play our parts perforce whether we do so consciously or not.

It appeared that the chauffeur had to be provided for, Sir Scorp had
to be given a hasty lunch. He seemed to fall in with the idea of a
short run to Penn before dark, even if the day were gloomy, and so,
after feeding him quickly before the grate fire in the drawing-room, we
were off--Sir Scorp, Barfleur, Berenice and Percy--Barfleur’s son--and
myself. Sir Scorp sat with me in the tonneau and Barfleur and Percy in
the front seat.

Sir Scorp made no effort to strike up any quick relationship with
me--remained quite aloof and talked in generalities. I could see
that he took himself very seriously--as well he might, seeing that,
as I understood it, he had begun life with nothing. There were
remarks--familiar ones concerning well-known painters, sculptors,
architects, and the social life of England.

This first afternoon trip was pleasant enough, acquainting me as it did
with the character of the country about Bridgely Level for miles and
miles. Up to this time I had been commiserated on the fact that it was
winter and I was seeing England under the worst possible conditions,
but I am not so sure that it was such a great disadvantage. To-day
as we sped down some damp, slippery hillside where the river Thames
was to be seen far below twisting like a letter S in the rain, I
thought to myself that light and color--summer light and color--would
help but little. The villages that we passed were all rain-soaked
and preternaturally solemn. There were few if any people abroad. We
did not pass a single automobile on the way to Penn and but a single
railroad track. These little English villages for all the extended
English railway system, are practically without railway communication.
You have to drive or walk a number of miles to obtain suitable railway
connection.

I recall the sag-roofed, moss-patterned, vine-festooned cottages of
once red but now brownish-green brick, half hidden behind high brick
walls where curiously clipped trees sometimes stood up in sentinel
order, and vines and bushes seemed in a conspiracy to smother the doors
and windows in an excess of knitted leafage. Until you see them no
words can adequately suggest the subtlety of age and some old order
of comfort, once prevailing, but now obsolete, which these little
towns and separate houses convey. You know, at a glance, that they
are not of this modern work-a-day world. You know at a glance that no
power under the sun can save them. They are of an older day and an
older thought--the thought perhaps that goes with Gray’s “Elegy” and
Goldsmith’s “Traveller” and “Deserted Village.”

That night at dinner, before and after, we fell into a most stirring
argument. As I recall, it started with Sir Scorp’s insisting that St.
Paul’s of London, which is a product of the skill of Sir Christopher
Wren, as are so many of the smaller churches of London, was infinitely
superior externally to the comparatively new and still unfinished Roman
Catholic Cathedral of Westminster. With that I could not agree. I have
always objected, anyhow, to the ground plan of the Gothic cathedral,
namely, the cross, as being the worst possible arrangement which could
be devised for an interior. It is excellent as a scheme for three or
four interiors--the arms of the cross being always invisible from the
nave--but as one interior, how can it compare with the straight-lying
basilica which gives you one grand forward sweep, or the solemn Greek
temple with its pediment and glorifying rows of columns. Of all
forms of architecture, other things being equal, I most admire the
Greek, though the Gothic exteriorly, even more than interiorly, has a
tremendous appeal. It is so airy and florate.

However, St. Paul’s is neither Greek, Gothic, nor anything else very
much--a staggering attempt on the part of Sir Christopher Wren to
achieve something new which is to me not very successful. The dome is
pleasing and the interior space is fairly impressive, but the general
effect is botchy, and I think I said as much. Naturally this was solid
ground for an argument and the battle raged to and fro,--through
Greece, Rome, the Byzantine East and the Gothic realms of Europe and
England. We finally came down to the skyscrapers of New York and
Chicago and the railway terminals of various American cities, but I
shall not go into that. What was more important was that it raised a
question concerning the proletariate of England,--the common people
from whom, or because of whom, all things are made to rise, and this
was based on the final conclusion that all architecture is, or should
be, an expression of national temperament, and this as a fact was
partly questioned and partly denied, I think. It began by my asking
whether the little low cottages we had been seeing that afternoon--the
quaint windows, varying gables, pointless but delicious angles, and
the battered, time-worn state of houses generally--was an expression
of the English temperament. Mind you, I love what these things stand
for. I love the simpleness of soul which somehow is conveyed by Burns
and Wordsworth and Hardy, and I would have none of change if life could
be ordered so sweetly--if it could really stay. Alas, I know it can
not. Compared to the speed and skill which is required to manipulate
the modern railway trains, the express companies, the hotels, the
newspapers, all this is helpless, pathetic.

Sir Scorp’s answer was yes, that they were an expression, but that,
nevertheless, the English mass was a beast of muddy brain. It did
not--could not--quite understand what was being done. Above it were
superimposed intellectual classes, each smaller and more enthusiastic
and aware as you reach the top. At least, it has been so, he said, but
now democracy and the newspapers are beginning to break up this lovely
solidarity of simplicity and ignorance into something that is not so
nice.

“People want to get on now,” he declared. “They want each to be greater
than the other. They must have baths and telephones and railways and
they want to undo this simplicity. The greatness of England has been
due to the fact that the intellectual superior classes with higher
artistic impulses and lovelier tendencies generally could direct the
masses and like sheep they would follow. Hence all the lovely qualities
of England; its ordered households, its beautiful cathedrals, its
charming castles and estates, its good roads, its delicate homes, and
order and precedences. The magnificent princes of the realm have been
able to do so much for art and science because their great impulses
need not be referred back to the mass--the ignorant, non-understanding
mass--for sanction.”

Sir Scorp sprang with ease to Lorenzo, the magnificent, to the princes
of Italy, to Rome and the Cæsars for illustration. He cited France
and Louis. Democracy, he declared, is never going to do for all what
the established princes could do. Democracy is going to be the death
of art. Not so, I thought and said, for democracy can never alter
the unalterable difference between high and low, rich and poor,
little brain and big brain, strength and weakness. It cannot abolish
difference and make a level plane. It simply permits the several planes
to rise higher together. What is happening is that the human pot is
boiling again. Nations are undergoing a transition period. We are in a
maelstrom, which means change and reconstruction. America is going to
flower next and grandly, and perhaps after that Africa, or Australia.
Then, say, South America, and we come back to Europe by way of India,
China, Japan and through Russia. All in turn and new great things from
each again. Let’s hope so. A pretty speculation, anyhow.

At my suggestion of American supremacy, Sir Scorp, although he
protested, no doubt honestly, that he preferred the American to any
other foreign race, was on me in a minute with vital criticism and I
think some measure of insular solidarity. The English do not love the
Americans--that is sure. They admire their traits--some of them, but
they resent their commercial progress. The wretched Americans will
not listen to the wise British. They will not adhere to their noble
and magnificent traditions. They go and do things quite out of order
and the way in which they should be done, and then they come over to
England and flaunt the fact in the noble Britisher’s face. This is
above all things sad. It is evil, crass, reprehensible, anything you
will, and the Englishman resents it. He even resents it when he is an
Irish Englishman. He dislikes the German much--fears the outcome of
a war from that quarter--but really he dislikes the American more. I
honestly think he considers America far more dangerous than Germany.
What are you going to do with that vast realm which is “the states”?
It is upsetting the whole world by its nasty progressiveness, and this
it should not be permitted to do. England should really lead. England
should have invented all the things which the Americans have invented.
England should be permitted to dictate to-day and to set the order of
forms and procedures, but somehow it isn’t doing it. And, hang it all!
the Americans _are_. We progressed through various other things,--an
American operatic manager who was then in London attempting to revise
English opera, an American tobacco company which had made a failure of
selling tobacco to the English, but finally weariness claimed us all,
and we retired for the night, determined to make Oxford on the morrow
if the weather faired in the least.

The next morning I arose, glad that we had had such a forceful
argument. It was worth while, for it brought us all a little closer
together. Barfleur, the children and I ate breakfast together while we
were waiting for Scorp to come down and wondering whether we should
really go, it was so rainy. Barfleur gave me a book on Oxford, saying
that if I was truly interested I should look up beforehand the things
that I was to see. Before a pleasant grate fire I studied this volume,
but my mind was disturbed by the steadily approaching fact of the trip
itself, and I made small progress. Somehow during the morning the
plan that Barfleur had of getting us invited to luncheon by his uncle
at Oxford disappeared and it turned out that we were to go the whole
distance and back in some five or six hours, having only two or three
hours for sightseeing.

At eleven Sir Scorp came down and then it was agreed that the rain
should make no difference. We would go, anyhow.

I think I actually thrilled as we stepped into the car, for somehow
the exquisite flavor and sentiment of Oxford was reaching me here. I
hoped we would go fast so that I should have an opportunity to see
much of it. We did speed swiftly past open fields where hay cocks were
standing drearily in the drizzling rain, and down dark aisles of bare
but vine-hung trees, and through lovely villages where vines and small
oddly placed windows and angles and green-grown, sunk roofs made me
gasp for joy. I imagined how they would look in April and May with the
sun shining, the birds flying, a soft wind blowing. I think I could
smell the odor of roses here in the wind and rain. We tore through
them, it seemed to me, and I said once to the driver, “Is there no law
against speeding in England?”

“Yes,” he replied, “there is, but you can’t pay any attention to that
if you want to get anywhere.”

There were graceful flocks of crows flying here and there. There were
the same gray little moss-grown churches with quaint belfries and odd
vine-covered windows. There were the same tree-protected borders of
fields, some of them most stately where the trees were tall and dark
and sad in the rain. I think an open landscape, such as this, with
green, wet grass or brown stubble and low, sad, heavy, gray clouds for
sky and background, is as delicious as any landscape that ever was.
And it was surely not more than one hour and a half after we left
Bridgely before we began to rush through the narrow, winding streets
where houses, always brick and stone and red walls with tall gates and
vines above them, lined either side of the way. It was old--you could
see that, even much that could be considered new in England was old
according to the American standard. The plan of the city was odd to me
because unlike the American cities, praise be! there was no plan. Not
an east and west street, anywhere. Not a north and south one. Not a
four- or five-story building anywhere, apparently, and no wood; just
wet, gray stone and reddish-brown brick and vines. When I saw High
Street and the façade of Queens College I leaped for joy. I can think
of nothing lovelier in either marble or bronze than this building line.
It is so gentle, so persuasive of beautiful thought, such an invitation
to reflection and tender romance. It is so obvious that men have worked
lovingly over this. It is so plain there has been great care and pains
and that life has dealt tenderly with all. It has not been destroyed
or revised and revivified, but just allowed to grow old softly and
gracefully.

Owing to our revised plans for luncheon I had several marmalade
sandwiches in my hand, laid in an open white paper which Barfleur had
brought and passed around, the idea being that we would not have time
for lunch if we wished to complete our visit and get back by dark. Sir
Scorp had several meat sandwiches in another piece of paper equally
flamboyant. I was eating vigorously, for the ride had made me hungry,
the while my eyes searched out the jewel wonders of the delicious
prospect before me.

“This will never do,” observed Sir Scorp, folding up his paper
thoughtfully, “invading these sacred precincts in this ribald manner.
They’ll think we’re a lot of American sightseers come to despoil the
place.”

“Such being the case,” I replied, “we’ll disgrace Barfleur for life. He
has relations here. Nothing would give me greater pleasure.”

“Come, Dreiser. Give me those sandwiches.”

It was Barfleur, of course.

I gave over my feast reluctantly. Then we went up the street, shoulder
to shoulder, as it were, Berenice walking with first one and another. I
had thought to bring my little book on Oxford and to my delight I could
see that it was even much better than the book indicated.

How shall one do justice to so exquisite a thing as Oxford,--twenty-two
colleges and halls, churches, museums and the like, with all their
lovely spires, towers, buttresses, ancient walls, ancient doors,
pinnacles, gardens, courts, angles and nooks which turn and wind and
confront each other and break into broad views and delicious narrow
vistas with a grace and an uncertainty which delights and surprises the
imagination at every turn. I can think of nothing more exquisite than
these wonderful walls, so old that whatever color they were originally,
they now are a fine mottled black and gray, with uncertain patches of
smoky hue, and places where the stone has crumbled to a dead white.
Time has done so much; tradition has done so much; pageantry and
memory; the art of the architect, the perfect labor of builder, the
beauty of the stone itself, and then nature--leaves and trees and the
sky! This day of rain and lowery clouds--though Sir Scorp insisted it
could stand no comparison with sunshine and spring and the pathos of a
delicious twilight was yet wonderful to me. Grays and blacks and dreary
alterations of storm clouds have a remarkable value when joined with so
delicate and gracious a thing as perfectly arranged stone. We wandered
through alleys and courts and across the quadrangles of University
College, Baliol College, Wadham College, Oriel College, up High
Street, through Park Street, into the Chapel of Queens College, into
the banquet of Baliol and again to the Bodleian Library, and thence by
strange turns and lovely gateways to an inn for tea. It was raining all
the while and I listened to disquisitions by Sir Scorp on the effect of
the personalities, and the theories of both Inigo Jones and Christopher
Wren, not only on these buildings but on the little residences in
the street. Everywhere, Sir Scorp, enthusiast that he is, found
something--a line of windows done in pure Tudor, a clock tower after
the best fashion of Jones, a façade which was Wren pure and simple. He
quarreled delightfully, as the artist always will, with the atrocity of
this restoration or that failure to combine something after the best
manner, but barring the worst errors which showed quite plainly enough
in such things as the Oxford art gallery and a modern church or two--it
was all perfect. Time and tradition have softened, petted, made lovely
even the plainest surfaces.

I learned from Barfleur where Walter Pater and Oscar Wilde lived, where
Shelley’s essay on atheism was burned, and where afterwards a monument
was erected to him, where some English bishops were burned for refusing
to recant their religious beliefs and where the dukes and princes of
the realm were quartered in their college days. Sir Scorp descanted on
the pity of the fact, that some, who would have loved a world such as
this in their youth, could never afford to come here, while others who
were as ignorant as boors and as dull as swine, were for reasons of
wealth and family allowed to wallow in a world of art which they could
not possibly appreciate. Here as elsewhere I learned that professors
were often cads and pedants--greedy, jealous, narrow, academic. Here as
elsewhere precedence was the great fetish of brain and the silly riot
of the average college student was as common as in the meanest school.
Life is the same, be art great or little, and the fame of even Oxford
cannot gloss over the weakness of a humanity that will alternately be
low and high, shabby and gorgeous, narrow and vast.

The last thing we saw were some very old portions of Christ College,
which had been inhabited by Dominican monks, I believe, in their day,
and this thrilled and delighted me quite as much as anything. I forgot
all about the rain in trying to recall the type of man and the type of
thought that must have passed in and out of those bolt-riven doors, but
it was getting time to leave and my companions would have none of my
lagging delight.

It was blowing rain and as we were leaving Oxford I lost my cap and had
to walk back after it. Later I lost my glove! As we rode my mind went
back over the ancient chambers, the paneled woodwork, stained glass
windows, and high vaulted ceilings I had just seen. The heavy benches
and somber portraits in oil sustained themselves in my mind clearly.
Oxford, I said to myself, was a jewel architecturally. Another thousand
years and it would be as a dream of the imagination. I feel now as if
its day were done; as if so much gentle beauty can not endure. I had
seen myself the invasion of the electric switch board and the street
car in High Street, and of course other things will come. Already the
western world is smiling at a solemnity and a beauty which are noble
and lovely to look upon, but which cannot keep pace with a new order
and a new need.




CHAPTER XVI

A CHRISTMAS CALL


The Christmas holidays were drawing near and Barfleur was making due
preparations for the celebration of that event. He was a stickler for
the proper observance of those things which have national significance
and national or international feeling behind them. Whatever joy he
might get out of such things, much or little, I am convinced that he
was much more concerned lest some one should fail of an appropriate
share of happiness than he was about anything else. I liked that in
Barfleur. It touched me greatly, and made me feel at times as though I
should like to pat him on the head.

During all my youth in Indiana and elsewhere I had been fed on that
delightful picture, “Christmas in England,” concocted first, I believe
(for American consumption, anyhow), by Washington Irving, and from
him rehashed for magazines and newspaper purposes until it had come
to be romance _ad nauseum_. The boar’s head carried in by the butler
of Squire Bracebridge, the ancient peacock pie with the gorgeous tail
feathers arranged at one end of the platter and the crested head at
the other, the yule log, the mistletoe berries, and the Christmas
choristers singing outside of windows and doors of echoing halls, had
vaguely stood their ground and as such had rooted themselves in my
mind as something connected with ancestral England. I did not exactly
anticipate anything of this kind as being a part of present-day
England, or of Barfleur’s simple country residence, but, nevertheless,
I was in England, and he was making Christmas preparations of one kind
or another, and my mind had a perfect right to ramble a little. I think
most of all I anticipated another kind of toy from that to which we are
accustomed in America.

So many things go to make up that very amiable feast of Christmas when
it is successful that I can hardly think now of all that contributed
to this one. There was Sir Scorp, of whom by now I had grown very
fond, and who was coming here to spend the holidays. There was Gerard
Barfleur, a cousin of Barfleur’s, a jolly, roystering theatrical
manager, who was unquestionably--after Barfleur--one of the most
pleasing figures I met in England, a whimsical, comic-ballad-singing,
character-loving soul, who was as great a favorite with women and
children as one would want to find. He knew all sorts of ladies,
apparently, of high and low degree, rich and poor, beautiful and
otherwise, and seemed kindly disposed toward them all. I could write a
splendid human-interest sketch of Gerard Barfleur alone. There was Mr.
T. McT., a pale, thoughtful person, artistic and poetic to his finger
tips, curator of one of the famous museums, a lover of Mr. Housman’s
“A Shropshire Lad,” a lover of ancient glass and silver, whose hair
hung in a sweet mop over his high, pale forehead, and whose limpid dark
eyes shone with a kindly, artistic light. Then there was Barfleur’s
aunt and her daughter, mother and sister respectively of the highly
joyous Gerard Barfleur, and wife and daughter of a famous litterateur.
Then, to cap it all, were the total of Barfleur’s very interesting
household,--housekeeper, governess, maid, cook, gardener, and--last,
but not least, the four charming, I might almost say adorable, children.

There, too, was Barfleur, a host in himself. For weeks beforehand he
kept saying on occasion as we wandered about London together, “No, we
can’t go there,” or, “You mustn’t accept that, because we have reserved
that Saturday and Sunday for Christmas at my place,” and so nothing was
done which might interfere. Being in his hands I finally consulted him
completely as to Christmas presents, and found that I was to be limited
to very small gifts, mere tokens of good-will, I being his guest. I
did manage to get him a supply of his favorite cigarettes, however,
unknown to himself,--the ones his clever secretary told me he much
preferred,--and had them sent out to the house with some favorite books
for the remaining members of the household.

But the man was in such high spirits over the whole program he had
laid out for me--winter and spring,--the thought of Paris and the
Riviera,--that he was quite beside himself. More than once he said
to me, beaming through his monocle, “We shall have a delightful time
on the continent soon. I’m looking forward to it, and to your first
impressions.” Every evening he wanted to take my hastily scribbled
notes and read them, and after doing so was anxious to have me do
them all just that way, that is, day by day as I experienced them. I
found that quite impossible, however. Once he wanted to know if I had
any special preference in wines or cordials and I knew very well why
he asked. Another time he overheard me make the statement that I had
always longed to eat rich, odorous Limburger cheese from Germany.

“Done!” he exclaimed. “We shall have it for Christmas.”

“But, Papa,” piped up Berenice maliciously, “we don’t all have to have
it at the same time, do we?”

“No, my dear,” replied Barfleur solemnly, with that amazingly
patronizing and parental air which always convulsed me, a sort of gay
deviltry always lurking behind it.

“Only Mr. Dreiser need have it. He is German and likes it.”

I assumed as German a look as I might,--profound, Limburgery.

“And I believe you like Mr. Jones’s sausage,” he observed on another
occasion, referring to an American commodity, which he had heard me say
in New York that I liked. “We shall have some of those.”

“Are American sausage like English sausage?” inquired young Charles
Gerald interestedly.

“Now Heaven only knows,” I replied. “I have never eaten English
sausages. Ask your father.”

Barfleur merely smiled. “I think not,” he replied.

“Christmas is certainly looking up,” I said to him badgeringly. “If I
come out of here alive,--in condition for Paris and the Riviera,--I
shall be grateful.”

He beamed on me reprovingly.

Well, finally, to make a long story short, the day came, or, at
least, the day before. We were all assembled for a joyous Christmas
Eve--T. McT., Sir Scorp, Gerard Barfleur, the dearest aunt and the
charming cousin, extremely intelligent and artistic women both, the
four children, Barfleur’s very clever and appealing secretary, and
myself. There was a delightful dinner spread at seven-thirty, when
we all assembled to discuss the prospects of the morrow. It was on
the program, as I discovered, that I should arise, and accompany
Barfleur, his aunt, his cousin, and the children to a nearby abbey
church, a lovely affair, I was told, on the bank of the Thames hard
by the old English town called Bridgely, while Gerard Barfleur, who
positively refused to have anything to do with religion of any kind,
quality or description, was to go and reconnoiter a certain neighboring
household (of which more anon), and to take young James Herbert (he
of the “bawth”) for a fine and long-anticipated ride on his motor
cycle. Lord Scorp and T. McT. were to remain behind to discuss art,
perhaps, or literature, being late risers. If there was to be any Santa
Claus, which the children doubted, owing to Barfleur’s rather grave
asseveration to the contrary (there having been a number of reasons why
a severely righteous Santa might see fit to remain away), he was not to
make his appearance until rather late in the afternoon. Meanwhile we
had all adjourned to the general living-room, where a heavy coal fire
blazed on the hearth (for once), and candles were lighted in profusion.
The children sang songs of the north, accompanied by their governess. I
can see their quaint faces now, gathered about the piano. Lord Scorp,
McT. and myself indulged in various artistic discussions and badinage;
Mrs. Barfleur, the aunt, told me the brilliant story of her husband’s
life,--a great naturalistic philosopher and novelist,--and finally
after coffee, sherry, nuts and much music and songs,--some comic ones
by Gerard Barfleur,--we retired for the night.

It is necessary, to prepare the reader properly for the morrow, to
go back a few days or weeks, possibly, and tell of a sentimental
encounter that befell me one day as I was going for a walk in that
green world which encompassed Bridgely Level. It was a most delightful
spectacle. Along the yellowish road before me, with its border of green
grass and green though leafless trees, there was approaching a most
interesting figure of a woman, a chic, dashing bit of femininity,--at
once (the presumption, owing to various accompanying details was
mine) wife, mother, chatelaine,--as charming a bit of womanhood and
English family sweetness as I had yet seen in England. English women,
by and large, let me state here, are not smart, at least those that I
encountered; but here was one dressed after the French fashion in trig,
close-fitting blue, outlining her form perfectly, a little ermine cap
of snowy whiteness set jauntily over her ear, her smooth black hair
parted demurely over her forehead, a white muff warming her hands, and
white spats emphasizing the trim leather of her foot gear. Her eyes
were dark brown, her cheeks rosy, her gait smart and tense. I could
scarcely believe she was English, the mother of the three-year-old in
white and red wool, a little girl, who was sitting astride a white
donkey, which, in turn, was led by a trim maid or nurse or governess
in somber brown,--but it was quite plain that she was. There was such
a wise, sober look about all this smartness, such a taut, buttressed
conservatism, that I was enchanted. It was such a delightful picture
to encounter of a clear December morning that, in the fashion of the
English, I exclaimed, “My word! This is something like!”

I went back to the house that afternoon determined to make inquiries.
Perhaps she was a neighbor,--a friend of the family!

Of all the individuals who have an appropriate and superior taste for
the smart efforts of the fair sex, commend me to Barfleur. His interest
and enthusiasm neither flags nor fails. Being a widower of discretion
he knows exactly what is smart for a woman as well as a man, and all
you have to do to make him prick up his ears attentively is to mention
trig beauty as existing in some form, somewhere,--not too distant for
his adventuring.

“What’s this?” I can see his eye lighting. “Beauty? A lovely woman?
When? Where?”

This day, finding Wilkins in the garden trimming some bushes, I had
said, “Wilkins, do you know any family hereabouts that keeps a white
donkey?”

Wilkins paused and scratched his ear reflectively. “No, sir! I cawn’t
say has I do, sir. I might harsk, sir, down in the village, hif you’re
very hanxious to know.”

Be it known by all men that I feed Wilkins amply for all services
performed,--hence his interest.

“Never mind for the present, Wilkins,” I replied. “I may want to know.
If so, I’ll ask you.”

I knew he would inquire anyhow.

That night at dinner, the family being all present, Barfleur in his
chair at the head of the table, the wine at his right, I said mildly--

“I saw the most beautiful woman to-day I have yet seen in England.”

Barfleur was just in the act of elevating a glass of champagne to his
lips, but he paused to fix me with an inquiring eye.

“Where?” he questioned solemnly. “Were you in the city?”

“Not at all. I rarely, if ever, see them in the city. It was very near
here. A most beautiful woman,--very French,--trim figure, small feet, a
gay air. She had a lovely three-year-old child with her riding a white
donkey.”

“A white donkey? Trim, very French, you say? This is most interesting!
I don’t recall any one about here who keeps a white donkey. Berenice,”
he turned to his young daughter. “Do you recall any one hereabout who
keeps a white donkey?”

Berenice, a wizard of the future, merely smiled wisely.

“I do not, Papa.”

“This is very curious, very curious indeed,” continued Barfleur,
returning to me. “For the life of me, I cannot think of any one who
keeps a white donkey. Who can she be? Walking very near here, you say?
I shall have a look into this. She may be the holiday guest of some
family. But the donkey and child and maid--Young, you say? Percy, you
don’t remember whether any one hereabout owns a white donkey,--any one
with a maid and a three-year-old child?”

Percy smiled broadly. “No, I don’t,” he said. Barfleur shook his head
in mock perturbation. “It’s very strange,” he said. “I don’t like the
thought of there being any really striking women hereabout of whom I
know nothing.” He drank his wine.

There was no more of this then, but I knew that in all probability the
subject would come up again. Barfleur inquired, and Wilkins inquired,
and as was natural, the lady was located. She turned out to be the wife
of a tennis, golf, and aeroplane expert or champion, a man who held
records for fast automobiling and the like, and who was independently
settled in the matter of means. Mrs. Barton Churchill was her name as
I recall. It also turned out most unfortunately that Barfleur did not
know her, and could not place any one who did.

“This is all very trying,” he said when he discovered this much. “Here
you are, a celebrated American author, admiring a very attractive woman
whom you meet on the public highway; and here am I, a resident of the
neighborhood in which she is living, and I do not even know her. If I
did, it would all be very simple. I could take you over, she would be
immensely flattered at the nice things you have said about her. She
would be grateful to me for bringing you. Presto,--we should be fast
friends.”

“Exactly,” I replied sourly. “You and she would be fast friends. After
I am gone in a few days all will be lovely. I shall not be here to
protect my interests. It is always the way. I am the cat’s paw, the
bait, the trap. I won’t stand for it. I saw her first, and she is mine.”

“My dear fellow,” he exclaimed banteringly, “how you go on! I don’t
understand you at all. This is England. The lady is married. A little
neighborly friendship. Hmm.”

“Yes, yes,” I replied. “I know all about the neighborly friendship. You
get me an introduction to the lady and I shall speak for myself.”

“As for that matter,” he added thoughtfully, “it would not be
inappropriate under the circumstances for me to introduce myself in
your behalf. She would be pleased, I’m sure. You are a writer, you
admire her. Why shouldn’t she be pleased?”

“Curses!” I exclaimed. “Always in the way. Always stepping in just when
I fancy I have found something for myself.”

But nothing was done until Gerard Barfleur arrived a day or two before
Christmas. That worthy had traveled all over England with various
theatrical companies. Being the son of an eminent literary man he had
been received in all circles, and knew comfortable and interesting
people in every walk of life apparently, everywhere. Barfleur, who, at
times, I think, resented his social sufficiency, was nevertheless prone
to call on him on occasion for advice. On this occasion, since Gerard
knew this neighborhood almost as well as his cousin, he consulted him
as to our lady of the donkey.

“Mrs. Churchill? Mrs. Barton Churchill?” I can still see his interested
look. “Why, it seems to me that I do know some one of that name. If I
am not mistaken I know her husband’s brother, Harris Churchill, up in
Liverpool. He’s connected with a bank up there. We’ve motored all over
England together, pretty nearly. I’ll stop in Christmas morning and see
if it isn’t the same family. The description you give suits the lady I
know almost exactly.”

[Illustration: Barfleur]

I was all agog. The picture she had presented was so smart. Barfleur
was interested though perhaps disappointed, too, that Gerard knew
her when he didn’t.

“This is most fortunate,” he said to me solemnly. “Now if it should
turn out that he does know her, we can call there Christmas day after
dinner. Or perhaps he will take you.”

This came a little regretfully, I think, for Gerard Barfleur accounted
himself an equal master with his cousin in the matter of the ladies,
and was not to be easily set aside. So Christmas eve it was decided
that Gerard should, on the morrow, reconnoiter the Churchill country
house early, and report progress, while we went to church. Fancy
Barfleur and me marching to church Christmas morning with the children!

Christmas in England! The day broke clear and bright, and there we all
were. It was not cold, and as is usual, there was little if any wind. I
remember looking out of my window down into the valley toward Bridgely,
and admiring the green rime upon the trees, the clustered chimneys of
a group of farmers’ and working-men’s cottages, the low sagging roofs
of red tile or thatch, and the small window panes that always somehow
suggest a homey simplicity that I can scarcely resist. The English
milkmaid of fiction, the simple cottages, the ordered hierarchy of
farmers are, willy nilly, fixtures in my mind. I cannot get them out.

First then, came a breakfast in our best bibs and tuckers, for were
we not to depart immediately afterwards to hear an English Christmas
service? Imagine Barfleur--the pride of Piccadilly,--marching
solemnly off at the head of his family to an old, gray abbey church.
As the French say, “I smile.” We all sat around and had our heavy
English breakfast,--tea, and, to my comfort and delight, “Mr. Jones’s
sausages.” Barfleur had secured a string of them from somewhere.

“Think of it,” commented Berenice sardonically. “‘Mr. Jones’s
sausages’ for breakfast. Aren’t they comic! Do you like them?”

“I most assuredly do.”

“And do you eat them every day in A-máy-reeka?” queried Charles Gerard
with a touch of latent jesting in his voice.

“When I can afford them, yes.”

“They’re quite small, aren’t they?” commented five-year-old James
Herbert.

“Precisely,” I replied, unabashed by this fire of inquiry. “That’s
their charm.”

The church that we visited was one of those semi-ancient abbey affairs,
done in good English Gothic, with a touch of Tudor here and there,
and was located outside the village of Bridgely Level two or three
miles from Barfleur’s home. I recall with simple pleasure the smug,
self-righteous, Sunday-go-to-meeting air with which we all set forth,
crossing homey fields via diagonal paths, passing through stiles
and along streams and country roads, by demure little cottages that
left one breathless with delight. I wish truly that England could be
put under glass and retained as a perfect specimen of unconscious,
rural poetry--the south of England. The pots and pans outside the
kitchen doorways! The simple stoop, ornamented with clambering vines!
The reddish-green sagging roofs with their clustered cylindrical
chimneypots! When we came to the top of a hill we could see the church
in the valley below, nestling beside one bank of the Thames which wound
here and there in delightful S’s. A square tower, as I recall, rose
quaintly out of a surrounding square of trees, grass, grave-stones and
box-hedge.

There was much ado in this semi-ancient place as we came up, for
Christmas day, of all days, naturally drew forth a history-loving
English audience. Choir boys were scurrying here and there, some
ladies of solemn demeanor, who looked as if they might be assisting at
the service in some way or another, were dawdling about, and I even
saw the rector in full canonicals hastening up a gravel path toward a
side door, as though matters needed to be expedited considerably. The
interior was dark, heavy-beamed, and by no means richly ornamented
with stained glass, but redolent of by-gone generations at that. The
walls were studded with those customary slabs and memorial carvings
with which the English love to ornament their church interiors. A
fair-sized, and yet for so large an edifice, meager audience was
present, an evidence it seemed to me, of the validity of the protest
against state support for the Established Church. There was a great
storm of protest in England at this time against the further state
support of an institution that was not answering the religious needs
of the people, and there had been some discussion of the matter at
Barfleur’s house. As was natural, the artistically inclined were
in favor of anything which would sustain, unimpaired, whether they
had religious value or not, all the old cathedrals, abbeys, and
neighborhood churches, solely because of their poetic appearance.
On the other hand an immense class, derisively spoken of as “chapel
people,” were heartily in favor of the ruder disposition of the matter.
Barfleur in his best Piccadilly clothing was for their maintenance.

To be frank, as charming as was this semi-ancient atmosphere, and
possibly suited to the current English neighborhood mood (I could not
say as to that), it did not appeal to me as strongly on this occasion
as did many a similar service in American churches of the same size.
The vestments were pleasing as high church vestments go; the choir,
made of boys and men from the surrounding countryside no doubt, was
not absolutely villainous but it could have been much better. To tell
the truth, it seemed to me that I was witnessing the last and rather
threadbare evidences of an older and much more prosperous order of
things. Beautiful in its way? Yes. Quaint? Yes. But smacking more of
poverty and an ordered system continued past its day than anything
else. I felt a little sorry for the old church and the thin rector and
the goodly citizens, albeit a little provincial, who clung so fatuously
to a time-worn form. They have their place, no doubt, and it makes that
sweet, old lavender atmosphere which seems to hover over so much that
one encounters in England. Nevertheless life does move on, and we must
say good-bye to many a once delightful thing. Why not set these old
churches aside as museums or art galleries, or for any other public
use, as they do with many of them in Italy, and let the matter go at
that? It is not necessary that a service be kept up in them day by
day and year by year. Services on special or state occasions would be
sufficient. Let by-gones be by-gones, and let the people tax themselves
for things they really do want, skating-rinks, perhaps, and moving
pictures. They seemed to flourish even in these elderly and more sedate
neighborhoods.

Outside in the graveyard, after the services were over and we were
idling about a few moments, I found a number of touches of that valiant
simplicity in ability which is such a splendid characteristic of the
English. Although there were many graves here of the nobility and
gentry, dating from as far back as the sixteenth century, there was no
least indication so far as I could see, of ostentation, but everywhere
simple headstones recording names only, and not virtues,--sometimes,
perhaps, a stately verse or a stoic line. I noticed with a kind of
English-speaking pride the narrow new-made grave of Sir Robert Hart,
the late great English financial administrator of China, who, recently
deceased, had been brought over sea to this simple churchyard, to lie
here with other members of his family in what I assumed to be the
neighborhood of his youth and nativity. It is rather fine, I think,
when a nation’s sons go forth over the world to render honorable
service, each after his capacity, and then come back in death to an
ancient and beloved soil. The very obscurity of this little grave with
its two-feet, six-inch headstone and flowerless mound spoke more to me
of the dignity and ability that is in true greatness of soul than a
soaring shaft might otherwise do.

On the way home I remember we discussed Christian Science and its
metaphysical merit in a world where all creeds and all doctrines blow,
apparently, so aimlessly about. Like all sojourners in this fitful
fever of existence Mrs. Barfleur and her daughter and her son, the
cheerful Gerard were not without their troubles; so much so that,
intelligent woman that she was, and quite aware of the subtleties and
uncertainties of religious dogma, she was eager to find something upon
which she could lean,--spiritually speaking,--the strong arm, let us
say, of an All Mighty, no less, who would perchance heal her of her
griefs and ills. I take it, as I look at life, that only the very able
intellectually, or the very rock-ribbed and dull materially can front
the storms and disasters that beset us, or the ultimate dark which
only the gifted, the imaginative, see, without quakes and fears. So
often have I noticed this to be true, that those who stand up brave
and strong in their youth turn a nervous and anguished eye upon this
troubled seeming in later years. They have no longer any heart for a
battle that is only rhyme and no reason, and, whether they can conceive
why or not, they must have a god. I, for one, would be the last person
in the world to deny that everywhere I find boundless evidence of
an intelligence or intelligences far superior to my own. I, for one,
am inclined to agree with the poet that “if my barque sink, ’tis to
another sea.” In fact I have always innately presumed the existence of
a force or forces that, possibly ordered in some noble way, maintain
a mathematical, chemical, and mechanical parity and order in visible
things. I have always felt, in spite of all my carpings, that somehow
in a large way there is a rude justice done under the sun, and that a
balance for, I will not say right, but for happiness is maintained.
The world has long since gathered to itself a vast basket of names
such as Right, Justice, Mercy, and Truth. My thinking has nothing to
do with these. I do not believe that we can conceive what the ultimate
significance of anything is, therefore why label it? I have seen good
come to the seemingly evil and evil come to the seemingly good. But if
a religion will do anybody any good, for Heaven’s sake, let him have
it! To me it is a case of individual, sometimes of race weakness. A
stronger mind could not attempt to define what may not be defined, nor
to lean upon what, to infinite mind must be utterly insubstantial and
thin air. Obviously there is a vast sea of force. Is it good? Is it
evil? Give that to the philosophers to fight over, and to the fearful
and timid give a religion. “A mighty fortress is our God,” sang Luther.
He may be, I do not know.

But to return to Mrs. Barfleur and her daughter and Barfleur’s children
and Barfleur ambling across the sunny English landscape this Christmas
morning. It was a fine thing to see the green patina of the trees,
and richer green grass growing lush and thick all winter long, and
to see the roofs of little towns like Bridgely Level,--for we were
walking on high ground,--and the silvery windings of the Thames in
the valley below, whence we had just come. I think I established
the metaphysical basis of life quite ably,--for myself,--and urged
Mrs. Barfleur to take up Christian Science. I assailed the wisdom of
maintaining by state funds the Established Church largely, I think, to
irritate Barfleur, and protested that the chapel people had a great
deal of wisdom on their side. As we drew near Bridgely Level and
Barfleur’s country place it occurred to me that Gerard Barfleur had
gone to find out if he really knew the lady of the donkey, and I was
all anxiety to find out. Barfleur himself was perking up considerably,
and it was agreed that first we would have an early afternoon feast,
all the Christmas dainties of the day, and then, if Gerard really knew
the lady, we were to visit her and then return to the house, where, I
now learned, there was to be a Santa Claus. He was to arrive via the
courtesy of Gerard Barfleur who was to impersonate him, and on that
account, Barfleur announced, we might have to cut any impending visit
to our lady short in order not to disappoint the children, but visit we
would. Knowing Gerard Barfleur to be a good actor and intensely fond of
children,--Barfleur’s especially,--I anticipated some pleasure here.
But I will be honest, the great event of the day was our lady of the
donkey, her white furs, and whether she was really as striking as I
had imagined. I was afraid Gerard would return to report that either,
(A)--he did not know her, or (B)--that she was not so fascinating as
I thought. In either case my anticipated pleasure would come to the
ground with a crash. We entered, shall I say, with beating hearts.

Gerard had returned. With Sir Scorp and T. McT. he was now toasting his
English legs in front of the fire, and discoursing upon some vanity of
the day. At sight of the children he began his customary badinage but I
would have none of it. Barfleur fixed him with a monitory eye. “Well,”
he said, putting the burden of the inquiry on me. “Our friend here has
been quite restless during the services this morning. What did you find
out?”

“Yes,” chimed in Mrs. Barfleur who had been informed as to this
romantic encounter, “for goodness’ sake tell us. We are all dying to
know.”

“Yes, tell them,” sarcastically interpolated Lord Scorp. “There will be
no peace, believe me, until you do.”

“To be sure, to be sure,” cheerfully exclaimed Gerard, straightening
up from jouncing James Herbert. “I know her well. Her sister and her
husband are here with her. That little baby is hers, of course. They
live just over the hill here. I admire your taste. She is one of the
smartest women I know. I told her that you were stopping here and she
wants you to come over and see the Christmas tree lighted. We are all
invited after dinner.”

“Very good,” observed Barfleur, rubbing his hands. “Now that is
settled.”

“Isn’t she charming,” observed Mrs. G. A. Barfleur, “to be so politely
disposed?”

Thereafter the dinner could not come too soon, and by two-thirty we
were ready to depart, having consumed Heaven knows how many kinds of
wines and meats, English plum-pudding, and--especially for me--real
German Limburger. It was a splendid dinner.

Shall I stop to describe it? I cannot say, outside of the interesting
English company, that it was any better or any worse than many another
Christmas feast in which I have participated. Imagine the English
dining-room, the English maid, the housekeeper in watchful attendance
on the children, the maid, like a bit of Dresden china, on guard over
the service, Barfleur, monocle in eye, sitting solemnly in state
at the head of the board, Lord Scorp, T. McT., Gerard Barfleur, his
mother, her daughter, myself, the children all chattering and gobbling.
The high-sounding English voices, the balanced English phrases, the
quaint English scene through the windows,--it all comes back, a bit of
sweet color. Was I happy? Very. Did I enjoy myself? Quite. But as to
this other matter.

It was a splendid afternoon. On the way over, Barfleur and myself,
the others refusing contemptuously to have anything to do with this
sentimental affair, had the full story of our lady of the donkey and
her sister and the two brothers that they married.

We turned eventually into one of those charming lawns enclosed by a
high, concealing English fence, and up a graveled automobile path to a
snow-white Georgian door. We were admitted to a hall that at once bore
out the testimony as to the athletic prowess of the husbands twain.
There were guns, knives, golf-sticks, tennis rackets, automobile togs
and swords. I think there were deer and fox heads in the bargain. By
a ruddy, sportsmanlike man of perhaps thirty-eight, and all of six
feet tall, who now appeared, we were invited to enter, make ourselves
at home, drink what we would, whiskey, sherry, ale--a suitable list.
We declined the drink, putting up fur coats and sticks and were
immediately asked into the billiard room where the Christmas tree and
other festivities were holding,--or about to be. Here, at last there
were my lady of the donkey and the child and the maid and my lady’s
sister and alas, my lady’s husband, full six feet tall and vigorous
and, of all tragic things, fingering a forty-caliber, sixteen-shot
magazine pistol which his beloved brother of sporting proclivities had
given him as a Christmas present! I eyed it as one might a special
dispensation of Providence.

But our lady of the donkey? A very charming woman she proved,
intelligent, smiling, very chic, quite aware of all the nice things
that had been said about her, very clever in making light of it for
propriety’s sake, unwilling to have anything made of it for the present
for her husband’s sake. But that Anglicized French air! And that
romantic smile!

We talked--of what do people talk on such occasions? Gerard was full of
the gayest references to the fact that Barfleur had such interesting
neighbors as the Churchills and did not know it, and that they had once
motored to Blackpool together. I shall not forget either how artfully
Barfleur conveyed to Mrs. Barton Churchill, our lady of the donkey,
that I had been intensely taken with her looks while at the same time
presenting himself in the best possible light. Barfleur is always at
his best on such occasions, Chesterfieldian, and with an air that says,
“A mere protegee of mine. Do not forget the managerial skill that is
making this interesting encounter possible.” But Mrs. Churchill, as
I could see, was not utterly unmindful of the fact that I was the
one that had been heralded to her as a writer, and that I had made
the great fuss and said all the nice things about her after a single
encounter on a country road which had brought about this afternoon
visit. She was gracious, and ordered the Christmas tree lighted and
had the young heir’s most interesting toys spread out on the billiard
table. I remember picking up a linen story book, labeled Loughlin
Bros., New York.

“From America,” I said, quite unwisely I think.

“Oh, yes, you Americans,” she replied, eyeing me archly. “Everything
comes from America these days, even our toys. But it’s rather
ungracious to make us admit it, don’t you think?”

I picked up a train of cars, and, to my astonishment, found it stamped
with the name of a Connecticut firm. I hesitated to say more, for I
knew that I was on dangerous ground, but after that I looked at every
book or box of blocks and the like, to find that my suspicions were
well founded. England gets many of its Christmas toys from America.

Nothing came of this episode except a pleasant introduction for
Barfleur, who had all the future before him. I was leaving for
Manchester after the new year, and for Paris a week or two later. It
was all in vain as I foresaw, that I was invited to call again, or
that she hoped to see something of me among her friends in London. I
think I said as much to Barfleur with many unkind remarks about the
type of mind that manages to secure all merely by a process of waiting.
Meantime he walked bravely forward, his overcoat snugly buttoned, his
cane executing an idle circle, his monocle on straight, his nose in the
air. I could have made away with him for much less.

The last of this very gallant day came in the home of Barfleur himself.
As we neared the house we decided to hurry forward and to say that
Gerard had remained at the Churchill’s for dinner, while he made a wide
detour, ending up, I think, in some chamber in the coach house. I did
not see him again until much later in the evening, but meantime the
children, the relatives, the friends and the family servants were all
gathered in the nursery on the second floor. There was much palaver
and badinage concerning the fact that Santa Claus had really had such
bad reports that he had found it much against his will to come here,
early at least. There were some rather encouraging things that had been
reported to him later, however, and he had, so some one had heard,
changed his mind. Whether there would be little or much for such a
collection of ne’er-do-wells was open to question. However if we were
all very quiet for a while we should see. I can see Barfleur now in
his gala attire, stalking nobly about, and the four little Barfleurs
surveying rather incredulously but expectantly the maid, the nurse, the
governess, and their father. I wondered what had become of my small
mementos and whether my special cigarettes for Barfleur were in safety
in Santa Claus’s pack. It was small stock, I fear me much, that these
well-behaved little English children took in this make-believe, but
presently there was a loud hammering at the nursery door, and without
a “By your leave,” the same was opened and a vigorous, woolly-headed
Santa Claus put his rosy face into the chamber.

“Is there any one living here by the name of Percy Franklin Barfleur,
or Berenice Barfleur, or James Herbert Barfleur?” I shall not repeat
all the names he called in a high falsetto voice, “I’ve been a long way
to-day and I’ve had a great deal to do, and I haven’t had the least
assistance from anybody. They’re so busy having a good time themselves.”

I never saw a redder nose, or more shaggy eye-browed eyes, or a gayer
twinkle in them. And the pack that he carried was simply enormous. It
could barely be squeezed through the door. As he made his way to the
center of the room he looked quizzically about, groaning and squeaking
in his funny voice, and wanting to know if the man in the monocle were
really Barfleur, and whether the fat lady in the corner were really a
nurse, or merely an interloper, and if the four children that had been
reported to him as present were surely there. Having satisfied himself
on various counts, and evoked a great deal of innocent laughter, to say
nothing of awe as to his next probable comment, he finally untied the
enormous bag and began to consult the labels.

“Here’s a package marked ‘Charles Gerard Barfleur.’ It’s rather large.
It’s been very heavy to carry all this distance. Can anybody tell me
whether he’s been a reasonably good child? It’s very hard to go to all
this trouble, if children aren’t really deserving.” Then, as he came
forward, he added, “He has a very impish look in his eye, but I suppose
I ought to let him have it.” And so the gift was handed over.

One by one the presents came forth, commented on in this fashion, only
the comments varied with the age and the personality of the recipient.
There was no lack of humor or intimacy of application, for this Santa
Claus apparently knew whereof he spoke.

“Is there a writer in the room by the name of Theodore Dreiser?” he
remarked at one time sardonically. “I’ve heard of him faintly and he
isn’t a very good writer, but I suppose he’s entitled to a slight
remembrance. I hope you reform, Mr. Dreiser,” he remarked very wisely,
as he drew near me. “It’s very plain to me that a little improvement
could be effected.”

I acknowledged the wisdom of the comment.

When my cigarettes were handed to Barfleur, Santa Claus tapped them
sapiently. “More wretched cigarettes!” he remarked in his high
falsetto. “I know them well! If it isn’t one vice that has to be
pampered, it’s another. I would have brought him pâté de foies gras or
wine, if I didn’t think this was less harmful. He’s very fond of prawns
too, but they’re very expensive at this time of the year. A little
economy wouldn’t hurt him.” Dora, the maid, and Mrs. A., the nurse,
and Miss C., the governess, came in for really brilliant compliments.
Lord Scorp was told that an old English castle or a Rembrandt would be
most suitable, but that Santa was all out at present, and if he would
just be a little more cheerful in the future he might manage to get
him one. T. McT. was given books, as very fitting, and in a trice the
place was literally littered with wonders. There were immense baskets
and boxes of candied fruit from Holland; toys, books and fruit from
Barfleur’s mother in Rome; more toys and useful presents from ladies in
London and the north of England and France and the Isle of Wight,--a
goodly company of mementos. It’s something to be an attractive widower!
I never saw children more handsomely or bountifully provided for--a
new saddle, bridle and whip for Berenice’s riding pony, curious
puzzles, German mechanical toys from Berlin, and certain ornamental
articles of dress seemed, by the astonishing bursts of excitement they
provoked, exceedingly welcome. Santa now drew off his whiskers and cap
to reveal himself as Gerard Barfleur, and we all literally got down
on the floor to play with the children. You can imagine, with each
particular present to examine, how much there was to do. Tea-time came
and went unnoticed, a stated occasion in England. Supper, a meal not
offered except on Christmas, was spread about eight o’clock. About
nine an automobile took Lord Scorp and T. McT. away, and after that
we all returned to the nursery until about ten-thirty when even by
the most liberal interpretation of holiday license it was bedtime. We
soberer elders (I hope no one sets up a loud guffaw) adjourned to the
drawing-room for nuts and wine, and finally, as the beloved Pepys was
accustomed to remark, “So to bed.”

But what with the abbey church, the discourse on Christian Science, our
lady of the donkey, a very full stomach and a phantasmagoria of toys
spinning before my eyes, I went to bed thinking of,--well now, what do
you suppose I went to bed thinking of?




CHAPTER XVII

SMOKY ENGLAND


For years before going to England I had been interested in the north
of England--the land, as I was accustomed to think, of the under dog.
England, if one could trust one’s impression from a distance, was a
land of great social contrasts--the ultimate high and the ultimate
low of poverty and wealth. In the north, as I understand it, were all
of the great manufacturing centers--Sheffield, Leeds, Nottingham,
Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester--a whole welter of smoky cities
whence issue tons upon tons of pottery, linen, cotton, cutlery. While
I was at Bridgely Level I spoke of my interest in this region to
Barfleur, who merely lifted his eyebrows. He knew little or nothing
about that northern world. The south of England encompassed his
interest. However, Barfleur’s cousin, the agreeable Gerard Barfleur,
told me soulfully that the north of England must be like America,
because it was so brisk, direct, practical, and that he loved it. (He
was a confirmed American “rooter” or “booster,” we would say over here,
and was constantly talking about coming to this country to enter the
theatrical business.)

I journeyed northward the last day of the old year to Manchester and
its environs, which I had chosen as affording the best picture of
manufacturing life. I had been directed to a certain hotel, recommended
as the best equipped in the country. I think I never saw so large a
hotel. It sprawled over a very large block in a heavy, impressive,
smoky-stone way. It had, as I quickly discovered, an excellent Turkish
and Russian bath in connection with it and five separate restaurants,
German, French, English, etc., and an American bar. The most important
travel life of Manchester centered here--that was obvious. I was told
that buyers and sellers from all parts of the world congregated in
this particular caravanserai. It was New Year’s day and the streets
were comparatively empty, but the large, showy, heavily furnished
breakfast-room was fairly well sprinkled with men whom I took to be
cotton operatives. There was a great mill strike on at this time and
here were gathered for conference representatives of all the principal
interests involved. I was glad to see this, for I had always wondered
what type of man it was that conducted the great manufacturing
interests in England--particularly this one of cotton. The struggle was
over the matter of the recognition of the unions and a slight raise in
the wage-scale. These men were very much like a similar collection of
wealthy manufacturers in the United States. Great industries seem to
breed a certain type of mind and body. You can draw a mental picture
of a certain keen, dressy, phlegmatic individual, not tall, not small,
round, solid, ruddy--and have them all. These men were so comfortably
solid, physically. They looked so content with themselves and the
world, so firm and sure. Nearly all of them were between forty-five
and sixty, cold, hard, quick-minded, alert. They differed radically
from the typical Englishman of the South. It struck me at once that if
England were to be kept commercially dominant it would be this type of
man, not that of the South, who would keep it so.

And now I could understand from looking at these men why it was that
the north of England was supposed to hate the south of England, and
vice versa. I had sat at a dinner-table in Portland Place one evening
and heard the question of the sectional feeling discussed. Why does it
exist? was the question before the guests. Well, the south of England
is intellectual, academic, historic, highly socialized. It is rich
in military, governmental, ambassadorial and titled life. The very
scenery is far more lovely. The culture of the people, because of the
more generally distributed wealth, is so much better. In the north of
England the poor are very poor and contentious. The men of wealth are
not historically wealthy or titled. In many cases they are “hard greedy
upstarts like the irrepressible Americans,” one speaker remarked. They
have no real culture or refinement. They manage to buy their way in
from time to time, it is true, but that does not really count. They are
essentially raw and brutal. Looking at these men breakfasting quietly,
I could understand it exactly. Their hard, direct efficiency would but
poorly adjust itself to the soft speculative intellectuality of the
south. Yet we know that types go hand in hand in any country with a
claim to greatness.

After my breakfast I struck out to see what I could see of the city.
I also took a car to Salford, and another train to Stockport in order
to gather as quick a picture of the Manchester neighborhood as I
could. What I saw was commonplace enough. All of the larger cities of
present-day Europe are virtually of modern construction. Most of them
have grown to their present great population in the last fifty years.
Hence they have been virtually built--not rebuilt--in that time.

Salford, a part of Manchester, was nothing--great cotton and machine
works and warehouses. Stockport was not anything either, save long
lines of brick cottages one and two stories high and mills, mills,
mills, mills. It always astounds me how life repeats itself--any idea
in life such as a design for a house--over and over and over. These
houses in Salford, Stockport and Manchester proper were such as you
might see anywhere in Chicago, St. Louis, Cincinnati, Baltimore--in
the cheap streets. I had the sense of being pursued by a deadly
commonplace. It all looked as people do when they think very little,
know very little, see very little, do very little. I expected to learn
that the churches flourished here very greatly and that there was an
enormous Sunday school somewhere about. There was--at Stockport--the
largest in the world I was told, five thousand students attending. The
thing that impressed me most was the presence of the wooden clog or
shoe.

In Stockport there was a drab silence hanging over everything--the
pathetic dullness of the laborer when he has nothing to do save the
one thing he cannot do--think. As it was a Sunday the streets were
largely empty and silent--a dreary, narrow-minded, probably religious,
conventional world which accepts this blank drabness as natural,
ordered, probably even necessary. To the west and the south and the
east and the north are great worlds of strangeness and wonder--new
lands, new people--but these folks can neither see nor hear. Here they
are harnessed to cotton-mills, believing no doubt that God intended
it to be so, working from youth to age without ever an inkling of the
fascinating ramifications of life. It appalled me.

In some respects I think I never saw so dreary a world as manufacturing
England. In saying this I do not wish to indicate that the working
conditions are any worse than those which prevail in various American
cities, such as Pittsburgh, and especially the minor cities like
Lawrence and Fall River. But here was a dark workaday world, quite
unfavored by climate, a country in which damp and fogs prevail for
fully three-fourths of the year, and where a pall of smoke is always
present. I remember reading a sign on one of the railway platforms
which stated that owing to the prevalence of fogs the company could
not be held responsible for the running of trains on time. I noticed
too, that the smoke and damp were so thick everywhere that occasionally
the trees on the roadside or the houses over the way would disappear
in a lovely, Corot-like mist. Lamps were burning in all stores and
office-buildings. Street cars carried head-lamps and dawned upon you
out of a hazy gloom. Traffic disappeared in a thick blanket a half
block away.

Most of these outlying towns had populations ranging from ninety to
a hundred thousand, but in so far as interesting or entertaining
developments of civic life were concerned--proportioned to their
size--there were none. They might as well have been villages of five
hundred or one thousand. Houses, houses, houses, all of the same size,
all the same color, all the same interior arrangement, virtually.

Everywhere--in Middleton, Oldham, and Rochdale, which I visited the
first day, and in Boulton, Blackburn, and Wigan, which I visited the
next--I found this curious multiplication of the same thing which you
would dismiss with a glance--whole streets, areas, neighborhoods of
which you could say, “all alike.”

In Middleton I was impressed with the constant repetition of “front
rooms” or “parlors.” You could look in through scores of partly open
doors (this climate is damp but not cold) and see in each a chest of
drawers exactly like every other chest in the town and in the same
position relative to the door. Nearly all the round tables which
these front rooms contained were covered with pink, patterned, cotton
tablecloths. The small single windows, one to each house, contained
blue or yellow jardinières set on small tables and containing
geraniums. The fireplace, always to the right of the room as you
looked in the window, glowed with a small coal fire. There were no
other ornaments that I saw. The ceilings of the rooms were exceedingly
low and the total effect was one of clean, frugal living.

The great mills bore pleasing names, such as Rob Roy, Tabitha,
Marietta, and their towering stacks looked down upon the humbler
habitations at their base much as the famous castles of the feudal
barons must have looked down upon the huts of their serfs. I was
constrained to think of the workaday existence that all this suggested,
the long lines of cotton-mill employees going in at seven o’clock in
the morning, in the dark, and coming out at six o’clock at night, in
the dark. Many of these mills employ a day and a night shift. Their
windows, when agleam in the smoke or rain, are like patins of fine
gold. I saw them gleaming at the end of dull streets or across the
smooth, olive-colored surfaces of mill ponds or through the mist and
rain. The few that were running (the majority of them were shut down
because of the strike) had a roar like that of Niagara tumbling over
its rocks--a rich, ominous thunder. In recent years the mill-owners
have abandoned the old low, two-story type of building with its narrow
windows and dingy aspect of gray stone, and erected in its stead these
enormous structures--the only approach to the American sky-scraper
I saw in England. They are magnificent mills, far superior to those
you will see to-day in this country, clean, bright and--every one I
saw--new. If I should rely upon my merely casual impression, I should
say that there were a thousand such within twenty-five miles of
Manchester. When seen across a foreground of low cottages, such as I
have described, they have all the dignity of cathedrals--vast temples
of labor. I was told by the American Consul-General at London that
they are equipped with the very latest cotton-spinning machinery and
are now in a position to hold their own on equal terms with American
competition, if not utterly to defy it. The intricacy and efficiency
of the machinery is greater than that employed in our mills. I could
not help thinking what a far cry it was from these humble cottages,
some few of which in odd corners looked like the simple, thatched huts
sacred to Burns and “The Cotter’s Saturday Night,” to these lordly
mills and the lordly owners behind them--the strong, able, ruthless men
whom I saw eating in the breakfast-room at the Midland the day before.
Think of the poor little girls and boys, principally girls, clattering
to and from work in their wooden shoes and, if you will believe it (I
saw it at Boulton on a cold, rainy, January day), in thin black shawls
and white straw hats, much darkened by continuous wear. One crowd that
I observed was pouring out at high noon. I heard a whistle yelling its
information, and then a mouse-hole of a door in one corner of the great
structure opened, and released the black stream of mill-workers. By
comparison, it looked like a small procession of ants or a trickle of
black water. Small as it was, however, it soon filled the street. The
air was wet, smoky, gray, the windows even at this midday hour gleaming
here and there with lights. The factory hands were a dreary mass in the
rain, some of them carrying umbrellas, many without them, all the women
wearing straw hats and black shawls!

I looked at their faces--pale, waxy, dull, inefficient. I looked
at their shapeless skirts hanging like bags about their feet. I
looked at their flat chests, their graceless hands, and then I
thought of the strong men who know how to use--I hesitate to say
exploit--inefficiency. What would these women do if they could not work
in the mills? One thing I am sure of: the mills, whatever charges
may be brought against their owners in regard to hours, insufficiency
of payment, indifference of treatment, are nevertheless better places
in which to spend one’s working hours than the cottages with their
commonplace round of duties. What can one learn washing dishes and
scrubbing floors in a cottage? I can see some one jumping up to
exclaim: “What can one learn tying commonplace threads in a cotton
mill, taking care of eight or nine machines--one lone woman? What
has she time to learn?” This--if you ask me; the single thought of
organization, if nothing more. The thought that there is such a thing
as a great machine which can do the work of fifty or a hundred men.
It will not do to say the average individual can learn this method
working in a home. It is not true. What the race needs is ideas. It
needs thoughts of life and injustice and justice and opportunity or
the lack of it kicked into its senseless clay. It needs to be made to
think by some rough process or other (gentleness won’t do it), and
this is one way. I like labor-leaders. I like big, raw, crude, hungry
men who are eager for gain--for self-glorification. I like to see them
plotting to force such men as I saw breakfasting at the Midland to
give them something--and the people beneath them. I am glad to think
that the clay whose womankind wears black shawls and straw hats in
January has sense enough at last to appoint these raw, angry fellows,
who scheme and struggle and fight and show their teeth and call great
bitter strikes, such as I saw here, and such as had shut tight so many
of these huge solemn mills. It speaks much for the race. It speaks much
for _thinking_, which is becoming more and more common. If this goes
on, there won’t be so many women with drabbly skirts and flat chests.
There will still be strong men and weak, but the conditions may not be
so severe. Anyhow let us hope so, for it is an optimistic thought and
it cheers one in the face of all the drab streets and the drab people.
I have no hope of making millionaires of everybody, nor of establishing
that futile abstraction, justice; but I do cherish the idea of seeing
the world growing better and more interesting for everybody. And the
ills which make for thinking are the only things which will bring this
about.




CHAPTER XVIII

SMOKY ENGLAND (_continued_)


At Middleton the mills are majestically large and the cottages
relatively minute. There is a famous old inn here, very picturesque to
look upon, and Somebody of Something’s comfortable manor, but they were
not the point for me. In one of its old streets, in the dark doorway of
an old house, I encountered an old woman, very heavy, very pale, very
weary, who stood leaning against the door post.

“What do you burn here, gas or oil?” I asked, interested to obtain
information on almost any topic and seeking a pretext for talking to
her.

“Hey?” she replied, looking at me wearily, but making no other move.

“What do you burn?” I asked. “What do you use for light, gas or oil?”

“Ile,” she replied heavily. “You’ll have to talk very loud. I’m gettin’
old and I’m goin’ to die pretty soon.”

“Oh, no,” I said, “you’re not old enough for that. You’re going to live
a long time yet.”

“Hey?” she asked.

I repeated what I had said.

“No,” she mumbled, and now I saw she had no teeth. “I’m gettin’ old.
I’m eighty-two and I’m goin’ to die. I been workin’ in the mills all my
life.”

“Have you ever been out of Middleton?” I asked.

“Hey?” she replied.

I repeated.

“Yes, to Manchester, Saturdays. Not of late, though. Not in years and
years. I’m very sick, though, now. I’m goin’ to die.”

I could see from her look that what she said was true. Only her
exceeding weariness employed her mind. I learned that water came from a
hydrant in the yard, that the kitchen floor was of earth. Then I left,
noticing as I went that she wore wooden-soled shoes.

In the public square at Boulton, gathered about the city-hall, where
one would suppose for the sake of civic dignity no unseemly spectacle
would be permitted, was gathered all the paraphernalia of a shabby,
eighth-rate circus--red wagons, wild animal and domestic horse tents,
the moderate-sized main tent, the side show, the fat woman’s private
wagon, a cage and the like. I never saw so queer a scene. The whole
square was crowded with tents, great and small; but there was little
going on, for a drizzling rain was in progress. Can human dullness
sink lower? I asked myself, feeling that the civic heart of things was
being profaned. Could utmost drabbiness out-drab this? I doubted it.
Why should the aldermen permit it? Yet I have no doubt this situation
appealed exactly to the imagination of the working population. I can
conceive that it would be about the only thing that would. It was just
raw and cheap and homely enough to do it. I left with pleasure.

When I came into Oldham on a tram-car from Rochdale, it was with my
head swimming from the number of mills I had seen. I have described the
kind--all new. But I did not lose them here.

It was the luncheon hour and I was beginning to grow hungry. As I
walked along dull streets I noticed several small eating-places labeled
“fish, chip, and pea restaurant” and “tripe, trotters, and cow-heels
restaurant,” which astonished me greatly--really astonished me. I had
seen only one such before in my life and that was this same morning
in Middleton--a “fish, chip, and pea restaurant”; but I did not get
the point sufficiently clearly to make a note of it. The one that I
encountered this afternoon had a sign in the window which stated that
unquestionably its chips were the best to be procured anywhere and very
nourishing. A plate of them standing close by made it perfectly plain
that potato chips were meant. No recommendation was given to either the
fish or the peas. I pondered over this, thinking that such restaurants
must be due to the poverty of the people and that meat being very dear,
these three articles of diet were substituted. Here in Oldham, however,
I saw that several of these restaurants stood in very central places
where the rents should be reasonably high and the traffic brisk. It
looked as though they were popular for some other reason. I asked a
policeman.

“What is a ‘fish, chip, and pea’ restaurant?” I asked.

“Well, to tell you the truth,” he said, “it’s a place where a man
who’s getting over a spree goes to eat. Those things are good for the
stomach.”

I pondered over this curiously. There were four such restaurants in the
immediate vicinity, to say nothing of the one labeled “tripe, trotters,
and cow-heels,” which astonished me even more.

“And what’s that for?” I asked of the same officer.

“The same thing. A man who’s been drinking eats those things.”

I had to laugh, and yet this indicated another characteristic of a wet,
rainy climate, namely considerable drinking. At the next corner a man,
a woman, and a child conferring slightly confirmed my suspicion.

“Come on,” said the man to the woman, all at once, “let’s go to the
pub. A beer’ll do you good.”

The three started off together, the child hanging by the woman’s hand.
I followed them with my eyes, for I could not imagine quite such a
scene in America--not done just in this way. Women--a certain type--go
to the back rooms of saloons well enough; children are sent with pails
for beer; but just this particular combination of husband, wife, and
child is rare, I am sure.

And such public houses! To satisfy myself of their character I went to
three in three different neighborhoods. Like those I saw in London and
elsewhere around it, they were pleasant enough in their arrangement,
but gloomy. The light from the outside was meager, darkened as it was
by smoke and rain. If you went on back into the general lounging-room,
lights were immediately turned on, for otherwise it was not bright
enough to see. If you stayed in the front at the bar proper it was
still dark, and one light--a mantled gas-jet--was kept burning. I asked
the second barmaid with whom I conferred about this:

“You don’t always have to keep a light burning here, do you?”

“Always, except two or three months in summer,” she replied. “Sometimes
in July and August we don’t need it. As a rule we do.”

“Surely, it isn’t always dark and smoky like this?”

“You should see it sometimes, if you call this bad,” she replied
contemptuously. “It’s black.”

“I should say it’s very near that now,” I commented.

“Oh, no, most of the mills are not running. You should see it when it’s
foggy and the mills are running.”

She seemed to take a sort of pride in the matter and I sympathized with
her. It is rather distinguished to live in an extreme of any kind, even
if it is only that of a smoky wetness of climate. I went out, making
my way to the “Kafe” Monico, as the policeman who recommended the
place pronounced it. Here I enjoyed such a meal as only a third-rate
restaurant which is considered first by the local inhabitants would
supply.

I journeyed forth once more, interested by the fact that, according
to Baedeker, from one point somewhere, _on a clear day_, whenever
that might be, six hundred stacks might be seen. In this fog I soon
found that it was useless to look for them. Instead I contented myself
with noting how, in so many cases, the end of a street, or the sheer
dismal length of an unbroken row of houses, all alike, was honored,
made picturesque, made grand even, by the presence of the mills, these
gloomy monuments of labor.

There is an architecture of manufacture, dreary and shabby as its
setting almost invariably is, which in its solemnity, strangeness of
outline, pathos and dignity, quite rivals, if it does not surpass, the
more heralded forms of the world--its cathedrals, parthenons, Moorish
temples and the like. I have seen it often in America and elsewhere
where a group of factory buildings, unplanned as to arrangement and
undignified as to substance, would yet take on an exquisite harmony of
line and order after which a much more pretentious institution might
well have been modeled. At Stockport, near Manchester, for instance, on
the Mersey, which here is little more than a rivulet, but picturesque
and lovely, I saw grouped a half-dozen immense mills with towering
chimneys which, for architectural composition from the vantage point
of the stream, could not have been surpassed. They had the dignity of
vast temples, housing a world of under-paid life which was nevertheless
rich in color and enthusiasm. Sometimes I fancy the modern world has
produced nothing more significant architecturally speaking, than
the vast manufactory. Here in Oldham they were gathered in notable
clusters, towering over the business heart and the various resident
sections so that the whole scene might well be said to have been
dominated by it. They bespeak a world of thought and feeling which we
of more intellectual fields are inclined at times to look on as dull
and low, but are they? I confess that for myself they move me at times
as nothing else does. They have vast dignity--the throb and sob of the
immense. And what is more dignified than toiling humanity, anyhow--its
vague, formless, illusioned hopes and fears? I wandered about the
dull rain-sodden thoroughfares, looking in at the store windows. In
one I found a pair of gold and a pair of silver slippers offered for
sale--for what feet in Oldham? They were not high in price, but this
sudden suggestion of romance in a dark workaday world took my fancy.

At four o’clock, after several hours of such wandering, I returned to
the main thoroughfare--the market-place--in order to see what it was
the hundred and fifty thousand inhabitants found to entertain them. I
looked for theaters and found two, one of them a large moving-picture
show. Of a sudden, walking in a certain direction my ears were greeted
by a most euphonious clatter--so interwoven and blended were the
particular sounds which I recognized at once as coming from the feet of
a multitude, shod with wooden-soled clogs. Where were they coming from?
I saw no crowd. Suddenly, up a side street, coming toward me down a
slope I detected a vast throng. The immense moving-picture theater had
closed for the afternoon and its entire audience, perhaps two thousand
in all, was descending toward the main street. In connection with
this crowd, as with the other at Boulton, I noted the phenomenon of
the black or white straw hat, the black or brown shawl, the shapeless
skirts and wooden-soled clogs of the women; the dull, commonplace
suit and wooden clogs of the men. Where were they going now? Home, of
course. These must be a portion of the strikers. They looked to me
like typical mill-workers out on a holiday and their faces had a waxy
pallor. I liked the sound of their shoes, though, as they came along.
It was like the rattle of many drums. They might have been waltzing on
a wooden floor. The thing had a swing and a rhythm of its own. “What
if a marching army were shod with wooden shoes!” I thought; and then,
“What if a mob with guns and swords came clattering so!”

A crowd like this is like a flood of water pouring downhill. They came
into the dark main street and it was quite brisk for a time with their
presence. Then they melted away into the totality of the stream, as
rivers do into the sea, and things were as they had been before.

If there were any restaurants other than the “Kafe” Monico, I did not
find them. For entertainment I suppose those who are not religiously
minded do as they do in Fall River and elsewhere--walk up and down past
the bright shop windows or sit and drink in the public houses, which
are unquestionably far more cheerful by night than by day.

The vast majority who live here must fall back for diversion on other
things, their work, their church, their family duties, or their vices.
I am satisfied that under such conditions sex plays a far more vital
part in cities of this description than almost anywhere else. For,
although the streets be dull and the duties of life commonplace,
sex and the mysteries of temperament weave their spells quite as
effectively here as elsewhere, if not more so. In fact, denied the
more varied outlets of a more interesting world, humanity falls back
almost exclusively on sex. Women and men, or rather boys and girls (for
most of the grown women and men had a drudgy, disillusioned, wearied
look), went by each other glancing and smiling. They were alert to be
entertained by each other, and while I saw little that I would call
beauty in the women, or charm and smartness in the men, nevertheless
I could understand how the standards of New York and Paris might not
necessarily prevail here. Clothes may not fit, fashion may find no
suggestion of its dictates, but after all, underneath, the lure of
temperament and of beauty is the same. And so these same murky streets
may burn with a rich passional life of their own. I left Oldham finally
in the dark and in a driving rain, but not without a sense of the
sturdy vigor of the place, keen if drab.




CHAPTER XIX

CANTERBURY


It was not so long after this that I journeyed southward. My plan was
to leave London two days ahead of Barfleur, visit Canterbury and Dover,
and meet with him there to travel to Paris together, and the Riviera.
From the Riviera I was to go on to Rome and he was to return to England.

Among other pleasant social duties I paid a farewell visit to Sir
Scorp, who shall appear often hereafter in these pages. During the
Christmas holidays at Barfleur’s I had become well acquainted with
this Irish knight and famed connoisseur of art, and while in London
I had seen much of him. Here in his lovely mansion in Cheyne Walk I
found him surrounded by what one might really call the grandeur of his
pictures. His house contained distinguished examples of Rembrandt,
Frans Hals, Van Dyck, Paul Potter, Velasquez, Mancini and others,
and as I contemplated him on this occasion he looked not unlike one
of the lymphatic cavaliers of Van Dyck’s canvases. A pale gentleman,
this--very remote in his spirit, very far removed from the common run
of life, concerned only with the ultimately artistic, and wishing to
be free of everything save the leisure to attend to this. He was not
going to leave London, he thought, at this time, except possibly for
a short visit to Paris. He was greatly concerned with the problem of
finding a dilapidated “cahstle” which he could restore, live in, fill
with his pictures and eventually sell, or dedicate to his beloved
England as a memorial of himself. It must be a perfect example of Tudor
architecture--that he invariably repeated. I gained the impression that
he might fill it with interesting examples of some given school or
artist and leave it as a public monument.

He urged upon me that I ought to go about the work of getting up a
loan exhibit of representative American art, and have it brought to
London. He commended me to the joys of certain cities and scenes--Pisa,
San Miniato outside of Florence, the Villa Doria at Rome. I had to
smile at the man’s profound artistic assurance, for he spoke exactly
as a grandee recounting the glories of his kingdom. I admired the
paleness of his forehead and his hands and cast one longing look at his
inestimable Frans Hals. To think that any man in these days should have
purchased for little a picture that can in all likelihood be sold for
$500,000--it was like walking into Aladdin’s cave.

The morning I left it was gray as usual. I had brought in all my
necessary belongings from Bridgely Level and installed them in my room
at the hotel, packed and ready. The executive mind of Barfleur was on
the qui vive to see that nothing was forgotten. A certain type of tie
must be purchased for use on the Riviera--he had overlooked that. He
thought my outing hat was not quite light enough in color, so we went
back to change it. I had lost my umbrella in the excitement, and that
had to be replaced. But finally, rushing to and fro in a taxi, loaded
like a van with belongings, Barfleur breathing stertorously after
each venture into a shop, we arrived at the Victoria Station. Never
having been on the Continent before, I did not realize until we got
there the wisdom of Barfleur’s insistence that I pack as much of my
belongings as possible in bags, and as little as possible in trunks.
Traveling first class, as most of those who have much luggage do,
it is cheaper. As most travelers know, one can take as many as five
or six parcels or bags in the compartment with one, and stow them
on racks and under the seats, which saves a heavy charge for excess
baggage. In some countries, such as Italy, nothing is carried free
save your hand-luggage which you take in your compartment with you. In
addition the rates are high. I think I paid as much as thirty shillings
for the little baggage I had, over and above that which I took in my
compartment with me. To a person with a frugal temperament such as
mine, that is positively disconcerting. It was my first taste of what I
came subsequently to look upon as greedy Europe.

As the train rushed southeastwards I did my best to see the pleasant
country through which we were speeding--the region indicated on the map
as North Downs. I never saw any portion of English country anywhere
that I did not respond to the charming simplicity of it, and understand
and appreciate the Englishman’s pride in it. It has all the quality of
a pastoral poem--the charm of Arcady--fields of sheep, rows of quaint
chimney pots and odd houses tucked away among the trees, exquisite
moldy and sagging roofs, doorways and windows which look as though
loving care had been spent on them. Although this was January, all the
leafless trees were covered with a fine thin mold, as green as spring
leaves. At Rochester the ruins of an ancient castle came into view and
a cathedral which I was not to see. At Faversham I had to change from
the Dover express to a local, and by noon I was at Canterbury and was
looking for the Fleur-de-lis which had been recommended to me as the
best hotel there. “At least,” observed Barfleur, quite solemnly to me
as we parted, “I think you can drink the wine.” I smiled, for my taste
in that respect was not so cultivated as his.

Of all the places I visited in England, not excluding Oxford, I believe
that Canterbury pleased me most. The day may have had something to
do with it. It was warm and gray--threatening rain at times--but at
times also the sun came out and gave the old English town a glow which
was not unrelated to spring and Paradise. You will have to have a
fondness for things English to like it--quaint, two-story houses with
unexpected twists to their roofs, and oriel and bay windows which have
been fastened on in the most unexpected places and in the strangest
fashion. The colors, too, in some instances, are high for England--reds
and yellows and blues; but in the main a smoky red-brick tone prevails.
The river Stour, which in America would be known as Stour’s Creek,
runs through the city in two branches; and you find it in odd places,
walled in closely by the buildings, hung over by little balconies
and doorsteps, the like of which I did not see again until I reached
Venice. There were rooks in the sky, as I noticed, when I came out of
the railway station; I was charmed with winding streets, and a general
air of peace and quiet--but I could not descry the cathedral anywhere.
I made my way up High Street--which is English for “Main”--and finally
found my recommended inn, small and dark, but in the hands of Frenchmen
and consequently well furnished in the matter of food. I came out after
a time and followed this street to its end, passing the famous gate
where the pilgrims used to sink on their knees and in that position
pray their way to the cathedral. As usual my Baedeker gave me a world
of information, but I could not stomach it, and preferred to look at
the old stones of which the gate was composed, wondering that it had
endured so long. The little that I knew of St. Augustine and King
Ethelbert and Chaucer and Thomas à Becket and Laud came back to me. I
could not have called it sacred ground, but it was colored at least
with the romance of history, and I have great respect for what people
once believed, whether it was sensible or not.

Canterbury is a city of twenty-eight thousand, with gas-works and
railroads and an electric-power plant and moving pictures and a
skating-rink. But, though it has all these and much more of the same
kind, it nevertheless retains that indefinable something which is pure
poetry and makes England exquisite. As I look at it now, having seen
much more of other parts of Europe, the quality which produces this
indefinable beauty in England is not so much embodied in the individual
as in the race. If you look at architectural developments in other
countries you have the feeling at times as if certain individuals had
greatly influenced the appearance of a city or a country. This is true
of Paris and Berlin, Florence and Milan. Some one seems to have worked
out a scheme at some time or other. In England I could never detect an
individual or public scheme of any kind. It all seemed to have grown
up, like an unheralded bed of flowers. Again I am satisfied that it is
the English temperament which, at its best, provides the indefinable
lure which exists in all these places. I noticed it in the towns
about Manchester where, in spite of rain and smoke, the same poetic
_hominess_ prevailed. Here in Canterbury, where the architecture dates
in its variation through all of eight centuries, you feel the dominance
of the English temperament which has produced it. To-day, in the newest
sections of London--Hammersmith and Seven Kings, West Dulwich and North
Finchley--you still feel it at work, accidentally or instinctively
constructing this atmosphere which is common to Oxford and Canterbury.
It is compounded of a sense of responsibility and cleanliness and
religious feeling and strong national and family ties. You really feel
in England the distinction of the fireside and the family heirloom;
and the fact that a person must always keep a nice face on things,
however bad they may be. The same spirit erects bird-boxes on poles
in the yard and lays charming white stone doorsteps and plants vines
to clamber over walls and windows. It is a sweet and poetic spirit,
however dull it may seem by comparison with the brilliant iniquities of
other realms. Here along this little river Stour the lawns came down to
the water in some instances; the bridges over it were built with the
greatest care; and although houses lined it on either side for several
miles of its ramblings, it was nevertheless a clean stream. I noticed
in different places, where the walls were quite free of any other
marks, a poster giving the picture and the history of a murderer who
was wanted by the police in Nottingham, and it came to me, in looking
at it, that he would have a hard time anywhere in England concealing
his identity. The native horror of disorder and scandal would cause him
to be yielded up on the moment.

In my wanderings, which were purely casual and haphazard, I finally
came upon the cathedral which loomed up suddenly through a curving
street under a leaden sky. It was like a lovely song, rendered with
great pathos. Over a Gothic gate of exquisite workmanship and endless
labor, it soared--two black stone towers rising shapely and ornate
into the gray air. I looked up to some lattices which gave into what
might have been the belfry, and saw birds perched just as they should
have been. The walls, originally gray, had been turned by time and
weather into a soft spongy black which somehow fitted in exquisitely
with the haze of the landscape. I had a curious sensation of darker
and lighter shades of gray--lurking pools of darkness here and there,
and brightness in spots that became almost silver. The cathedral
grounds were charmingly enclosed in vine-covered walls that were
nevertheless worked out in harmonious detail of stone. An ancient
walk of some kind, overhung with broken arches that had fallen into
decay, led away into a green court which, by a devious process of
other courts and covered arches, gave into the cloister proper. I
saw an old deacon, or canon, of the church walking here in stately
meditation; and a typical English yeoman, his trousers fastened about
the knee by the useless but immemorial strap, came by, wheeling a
few bricks in a barrow. There were endless courts, it seemed to me,
surrounded by two-story buildings, all quaint in design, and housing
Heaven-knows-what subsidiary factors of the archiepiscopal life. They
seemed very simple habitations to me. Children played here on the walks
and grass, gardeners worked at vines and fences, and occasional workmen
appeared--men who, I supposed, were connected with the architectural
repairs which were being made to the façade. As I stood in the
courtyard of the archbishop’s house, which was in front and to the
left of the cathedral as you faced it, a large blue-gray touring-car
suddenly appeared, and a striking-looking ecclesiastic in a shovel hat
stepped out. I had the wish and the fancy that I was looking at the
archbishop himself--a sound, stern, intellectual-looking person--but
I did not ask. He gave me a sharp, inquiring look, and I withdrew
beyond these sacred precincts and into the cathedral itself, where a
tinny-voiced bell was beginning to ring for afternoon service.

I am sure I shall never forget the interior of Canterbury. It was
the first really old, great cathedral that I had seen--for I had not
prized very highly either St. Paul’s or St. Alban’s. I had never quite
realized how significant these structures must have been in an age when
they were far and away the most important buildings of the time. No
king’s palace could ever have had the importance of Canterbury, and the
cry from the common peasant to the Archiepiscopal see must have been
immense. Here really ruled the primate of all England, and here Becket
was murdered.

Of all known architectural forms the Gothic corresponds more nearly to
the finest impulse in nature itself--that is, to produce the floreated
form. The aisles of the trees are no more appealing artistically than
those of a great cathedral, and the overhanging branches through which
the light falls have not much more charm than some of these perfect
Gothic ceilings sustained by their many branching arms of stone. Much
had happened, apparently, to the magnificent stained-glass windows
which must have filled the tall-pointed openings at different periods,
and many of them have been replaced by plain frosted glass. Those
that remain are of such richness of color and such delightful variety
of workmanship that, seen at the end of long stretches of aisles and
ambulatories, they are like splotches of blood or deep indigo, throwing
a strange light on the surrounding stone.

I presently fell in tow of a guide. It is said to-day that Americans
are more like the Germans than like the English; but from the types I
encountered in England I think the variety of American temperaments
spring naturally from the mother country. Four more typical New England
village specimens I never saw than these cathedral ushers or guides.
They were sitting on the steps leading up to the choir, clad in cap and
gown, engaged in cheerful gossip.

“Your turn, Henry,” said one, and the tallest of the three came around
and unlocked the great iron gates which give into the choir. Then
began, for my special benefit, a magnificent oration. We were joined,
after we had gone a little way, by a party of ladies from Pennsylvania
who were lurking in one of the transepts; and nothing would do but my
guide must go back to the iron entrance-way to the choir and begin
all over. Not a sentence was twisted, not a pause misplaced. “Good
heavens,” I thought, “he does that every day in the year, perhaps a
dozen times a day.” He was like a phonograph with but one record, which
is repeated endlessly. Nevertheless, the history of the archbishops,
the Black Prince, the Huguenot refugees, the carving of the woodwork
and the disappearance of the windows was all interesting. After having
made the rounds of the cathedral, we came out into the cloister, the
corridors of which were all black and crumbling with age, and he
indicated the spot and described the manner in which Becket had been
stabbed and had fallen. I don’t know when a bit of history has moved me
so much.

It was the day--the gentle quality of it--its very spring-like texture
that made it all so wonderful. The grass in this black court was as
green as new lettuce; the pendants and facets of the arches were
crumbling into black sand--and spoke seemingly of a thousand years.
High overhead the towers and the pinnacles, soaring as gracefully
as winged living things, looked down while I faced the black-gowned
figure of my guide and thought of the ancient archbishop crossing this
self-same turf (how long can be the life of grass?).

When I came outside the gate into the little square or triangle which
faces it I found a beautiful statue of the lyric muse--a semi-nude
dancing girl erected to the memory of Christopher Marlowe. It surprised
me a little to find it here, facing Canterbury, in what might be called
the sacred precincts of religious art; but it is suitably placed and
brought back to my mind the related kingdom of poetry.

All the little houses about have heavy overhanging eaves and
diamond-shaped, lead-paned windows. The walls are thick and
whitewashed, ranging in color from cream to brown. They seem unsuited
to modern life; and yet they frequently offered small shop-windows full
of all the things that make it: picture-postcards, American shoes,
much-advertised candy, and the latest books and magazines. I sought a
tea-room near by and had tea, looking joyously out against the wall
where some clematis clambered, and then wandered back to the depot to
get my mackintosh and umbrella--for it was beginning to rain. For two
hours more I walked up and down in the rain and dark, looking into
occasional windows where the blinds had not been drawn and stopping
in taprooms or public houses where rosy barmaids waited on one with
courteous smiles.




CHAPTER XX

EN ROUTE TO PARIS


One of the things which dawned upon me in moving about England, and
particularly as I was leaving it, was the reason for the inestimable
charm of Dickens. I do not know that anywhere in London or England I
encountered any characters which spoke very forcefully of those he
described. It is probable that they were all somewhat exaggerated. But
of the charm of his setting there can be no doubt. He appeared at a
time when the old order was giving way, and the new--the new as we have
known it in the last sixty years--was manifesting itself very sharply.
Railroads were just coming in and coaches being dispensed with; the
modern hotel was not yet even thought of, but it was impending.

Dickens, born and raised in London, was among the first to perceive
the wonder of the change and to contrast it graphically with what had
been and still was. In such places as St. Alban’s, Marlowe, Canterbury,
Oxford, and others, I could see what the old life must have been like
when the stage-coach ruled and made the principal highways lively with
traffic. Here in Canterbury and elsewhere there were inns sacred to
the characters of Dickens; and you could see how charming that world
must have appeared to a man who felt that it was passing. He saw it
in its heyday, and he recorded it as it could not have been recorded
before and can never be again. He saw also the charm of simple English
life--the native love of cleanly pots and pans and ordered dooryards;
and that, fortunately, has not changed. I cannot think of any one doing
England as Dickens did it until there is something new to be done--the
old spirit manifested in a new way. From Shakespeare to Dickens the cry
is long; from Dickens to his successors it may be longer still.

I was a bit perturbed on leaving Canterbury to realize that on the
morrow at this same time I should catch my first glimpse of Paris. The
clerk at the station who kept my bags for me noted that I came from New
York and told me he had a brother in Wisconsin, and that he liked it
very much out there.

I said, “I suppose you will be coming to America yourself, one of these
days?”

“Oh, yes,” he said; “the big chances are out there. I’ll either go to
Canada or Wisconsin.”

“Well, there are plenty of states to choose from,” I said.

“A lot of people have gone from this place,” he replied.

It rained hard on the way to Dover; but when I reached there it had
ceased, and I even went so far as to leave my umbrella in the train.
When I early discovered my loss I reported it at once to the porter who
was carrying my belongings.

“Don’t let that worry you,” he replied, in the calmest and most
assuring of English tones. “They always look through the trains. You’ll
find it in the parcel-room.”

Sure enough, when I returned there it was behind the clerk’s desk; and
it was handed to me promptly. If I had not had everything which I had
lost, barring one stick, promptly returned to me since I had been in
England, I should not have thought so much of this; but it confirmed my
impression that I was among a people who are temperamentally honest.

My guide led me to the Lord Warden Hotel, where I arranged myself
comfortably in a good room for the night. It pleased me, on throwing
open my windows, to see that this hotel fronted a bay or arm of the sea
and that I was in the realm of great ships and sea traffic instead of
the noisy heart of a city. Because of a slight haze, not strong enough
to shut out the lights entirely, fog-horns and fog-bells were going;
and I could hear the smash of waves on the shore. I decided that after
dinner I would reconnoiter Dover. There was a review of warships in the
harbor at the time; and the principal streets were crowded with marines
in red jackets and white belts and the comic little tambourine caps
cocked jauntily over one ear. Such a swarm of red-jackets I never saw
in my life. They were walking up and down in pairs and trios, talking
briskly and flirting with the girls. I fancy that representatives of
the underworld of women who prey on this type of youth were here in
force.

Much to my astonishment, in this Snargate Street I found a
south-of-England replica of the “Fish, Chip, and Pea” institution of
the Manchester district. I concluded from this that it must be an
all-English institution, and wherever there was much drunkenness there
would be these restaurants. In such a port as Dover, where sailors
freely congregate, it would be apt to be common; and so it proved.

Farther up High Street, in its uttermost reaches in fact, I saw a sign
which read: “Thomas Davidge, Bone-setter and Tooth-surgeon”--whatever
that may be. Its only rival was another I had seen in Boulton which
ran: “Temperance Bar and Herbal Stores.”

The next morning I was up early and sought the famous castle on the
hill, but could not gain admission and could not see it for the fog.
I returned to the beach when the fog had lifted and I could see not
only the castle on the hill, but the wonderful harbor besides. It
was refreshing to see the towering cliff of chalk, the pearl-blue
water, the foaming surf along the interesting sea walk, and the
lines of summer--or perhaps they are winter--residences facing the
sea on this one best street. Dover, outside of this one street, was
not--to me--handsome, but here all was placid, comfortable, socially
interesting. I wondered what type of Englishman it was that came to
summer or winter at Dover--so conveniently located between London and
Paris.

At ten-thirty this morning the last train from London making the boat
for Calais was to arrive and with it Barfleur and all his paraphernalia
bound for Paris.

It seems to me that I have sung the praises of Barfleur as a directing
manager quite sufficiently for one book; but I shall have to begin
anew. He arrived as usual very brisk, a porter carrying four or five
pieces of luggage, his fur coat over his arm, his monocle gleaming as
though it had been freshly polished, a cane and an umbrella in hand,
and inquiring crisply whether I had secured the particular position on
deck which he had requested me to secure and hold. If it were raining,
according to a slip of paper on which he had written instructions days
before I left London, I was to enter the cabin of the vessel which
crossed the channel; preëmpt a section of seat along the side wall by
putting all my luggage there; and bribe a porter to place two chairs
in a comfortable windless position on deck to which we could repair
in case it should clear up on the way over. All of this I faithfully
did. The chairs had the best possible position behind the deck-house
and one of my pieces of luggage was left there as a guarantee that
they belonged to me. It looked like rain when the train arrived, and
we went below for a sandwich and a cup of coffee; but before the boat
left it faired up somewhat and we sat on deck studying the harbor and
the interesting company which was to cross with us. Some twenty English
school-girls in charge of several severe-looking chaperones were
crossing to Paris, either for a holiday, or, as Barfleur suggested,
to renew their studies in a Paris school. A duller lot of maidens
it would be hard to conceive, and yet some of them were not at all
bad-looking. Conservatism and proper conduct were written all over
them. Their clothing was severely plain, and their manners were most
circumspect. None of that vivacity which characterizes the average
American girl would have been tolerated under the circumstances. There
was no undue giggling and little, if any, jesting. They interested me,
because I instantly imagined twenty American girls of the same age in
their place. They would have manifested twenty times the interest and
enthusiasm, only in England that would have been the height of bad
manners. As it was these English maidens sat in a quaint row all the
way over, and disappeared quite conservatively into the train at Calais.

This English steamer crossing the channel to France was a
disappointment to me in one way. I had heard for some time past that
the old uncomfortable channel boats had been dispensed with and new
commodious steamers put in their place. As a matter of fact, these
boats were not nearly so large as those that run from New York to Coney
Island, nor so commodious, though much cleaner and brighter. If it
had rained, as Barfleur anticipated, the cabin below would have been
intolerably overcrowded and stuffy. As it was, all the passengers were
on the upper deck, sitting in camp chairs and preparing stoically to
be sick. It was impossible to conceive that a distance so short, not
more than twenty-three or four miles, should be so disagreeable as
Barfleur said it was at times. The boat did not pitch to any extent
on this trip over. On my return, some three months later, I had
a different experience. But now the wind blew fiercely and it was
cold. The channel was as gray as a rabbit and offensively bleak. I
did not imagine the sea could be so dull-looking, and France, when
it appeared in the distance, was equally bleak in appearance. As we
drew near Calais it was no better--a shore-line beset with gas tanks
and iron foundries. But when we actually reached the dock and I saw
a line of sparkling French _facteurs_ looking down on the boat from
the platform above--presto! England was gone. Gone all the solemnity
and the politeness of the porters who had brought our luggage aboard,
gone the quiet civility of ship officers and train-men, gone the
solid doughlike quiescence of the whole English race. It seemed to
me on the instant as if the sky had changed and instead of the gray
misty pathos of English life--albeit sweet and romantic--had come the
lively slap-dash of another world. These men who looked down on us
with their snappy birdlike eyes were no more like the English than a
sparrow is like a great auk. They were black-haired, black-eyed, lean,
brown, active. They had on blue aprons and blue jumpers and a kind
of military cap. There was a touch of scarlet somewhere, either in
their caps or their jackets, I forget which; and somewhere near by I
saw a French soldier--his scarlet woolen trousers and lead-blue coat
contrasting poorly, so far as _éclat_ goes, with the splendid trimness
of the British. Nevertheless he did not look inefficient, but raw and
forceful, as one imagines the soldiers of Napoleon should be. The
vividness of the coloring made up for much, and I said at once that I
would not give France for fifty million Englands. I felt, although I
did not speak the language, as though I had returned to America.

It is curious how one feels about France, or at least how I feel
about it. For all of six weeks I had been rejoicing in the charms and
the virtues of the English. London is a great city--splendid--the
intellectual capital of the world. Manchester and the north represent
as forceful a manufacturing realm as the world holds, there is no
doubt of that. The quaintness and sweetness of English country life is
not to be surpassed for charm and beauty. But France has fifty times
the spirit and enthusiasm of England. After London and the English
country it seems strangely young and vital. France is often spoken of
as decadent--but I said to myself, “Good Lord, let us get some of this
decadence, and take it home with us. It is such a cheerful thing to
have around.” I would commend it to the English particularly.

On the way over Barfleur had been giving me additional instructions.
I was to stay on board when the boat arrived and signal a facteur
who would then come and get my luggage. I was to say to him, “_Sept
colis_,” whereupon he would gather up the bundles and lead the way to
the dock. I was to be sure and get his number, for all French facteurs
were scoundrels, and likely to rob you. I did exactly as I was told,
while Barfleur went forward to engage a section, first class, and to
see that we secured places in the dining-car for the first service.
Then he returned and found me on the dock, doing my best to keep track
of the various pieces of luggage, while the facteur did his best to
secure the attention of a customs inspector.

It was certainly interesting to see the difference between the arrival
of this boat at Calais and the similar boat which took us off the
_Mauretania_ at Fishguard. There, although the crowd which had arrived
was equally large, all was peaceful and rather still. The porters
went about their work in such a matter-of-fact manner. All was in
apple-pie order. There was no shouting to speak of. Here all was hubbub
and confusion, apparently, although it was little more than French
enthusiasm. You would have fancied that the French guards and facteurs
were doing their best to liberate their pent-up feelings. They bustled
restlessly to and fro; they grimaced; they reassured you frequently
by look and sign that all would be well, must be so. Inside of five
minutes,--during which time I examined the French news-stand and saw
how marvelously English conservatism had disappeared in this distance
of twenty miles,--the luggage had been passed on and we were ready to
enter the train. Barfleur had purchased a number of papers, _Figaro_,
_Gil Blas_, and others in order to indicate the difference between the
national lives of the two countries which I was now to contrast. I
never saw a man so eager to see what effect a new country would have
on another. He wanted me to see the difference between the English and
the French papers at once; and although I was thoroughly familiar with
it already, I carefully examined these latest productions of the French
presses. The same delicious nudities that have been flourishing in the
French papers for years were there, the same subtle Gallic penchant for
the absurd and the ridiculous. I marveled anew at the sprightliness of
these figures, which never cross the Atlantic into American papers.
We do not know how to draw them because we are not accustomed to them
in our lives. As a matter of fact the American papers and magazines
adhere rigorously to the English standard. We have varied some in
presentation, but have not broadened the least in treatment. As a
matter of fact I believe that the American weekly and monthly are even
more conservative than the British paper of the same standard. We think
we are different, but we are not. We have not even anything in common
with the Germans, from whom we are supposed to have drawn so much of
our national personality.

However,--the train started after a few moments and soon we were
speeding through that low flat country which lies between Calais and
Paris. It was a five-hour run direct, but we were going to stop off
at Amiens to see the great cathedral there. I was struck at once by
the difference between the English and the French landscape. Here the
trees were far fewer, and what there were of them were not tinged with
that rich green mold which is characteristic of every tree in England.
The towns, too, as they flashed past--for this was an express--were
radically different in their appearance. I noted the superabundance of
conical red roofs swimming in a silvery light, and hard white walls
that you could see for miles. No trees intervened to break the view,
and now and then a silvery thread of a river appeared.

It was on this trip that I gathered my first impressions of a French
railway as contrasted with those of England and America. The French
rails were laid to the standard gage, I noticed, and the cars were
after the American not the English style: large, clean, commodious,
with this improvement over the American car that they were of the
corridor and compartment style as contrasted with our one room,
open-space style. After my taste of the compartment car in England I
was fairly satisfied to part forever with the American plan of one long
open room in which every one can see every one else, interesting as
that spectacle may be to some. The idea of some privacy appealed to me
more. The American Pullman has always seemed a criminal arrangement to
me, anyhow, and at Manchester I had met a charming society woman who in
passing had told me that the first time she was compelled to undress in
an American sleeping car she cried. Her personal sense of privacy was
so outrageously invaded. Our large magnates having their own private
cars or being able to charter a whole train on occasion need not worry
about this small matter of delicacy in others (it would probably never
concern them personally anyhow) and so the mass and the unsuspecting
stranger is made to endure what he bitterly resents and what they
never feel. I trust time and a growing sense of chivalry in the men at
the top as well as a sense of privilege and necessity in the mass at
the bottom will alter all this. America is a changing country. In due
time, after all the hogs are fed or otherwise disposed of, a sense of
government of the people for the people will probably appear. It has
made only the barest beginning as yet. There are some things that the
rank and file are entitled to, however--even the rank and file--and
these they will eventually get.

I was charmed with the very medieval air of Amiens, when we reached
there, a bare, gray, cobble-stony city which, however, appeared to be
solid and prosperous. Here, as in the rest of France, I found that the
conical-roofed tower, the high-peaked roof, the solid gray or white
wall, and the thick red tile, fluted or flat, combined to produce
what may be looked upon as the national touch. The houses here varied
considerably from the English standard in being in many cases very
narrow and quite high for their width--four and five stories. They
are crowded together, too, in a seemingly defensive way, and seem to
lack light and air. The solid white or gray shutters, the thick fluted
rain-pipe, and the severe, simple thickness of the walls produced an
atmosphere which I came to look upon after a time as supremely Gallic,
lingering on from a time when France was a very different country from
what it is to-day.

Amiens was all of this. It would have seemed hard and cold and bare and
dry except for these little quirks of roofs, and the lightness of the
spirit of the people. We wandered through high-walled, cobble-paved
streets until suddenly we came on the cathedral, soaring upward out of
a welter of the dreary and commonplace. I had thought Canterbury was
wonderful--but now I knew that I had never seen anything in my life
before so imposing as Amiens. Pure Gothic, like Canterbury, it was so
much larger; a perfect maze of pinnacles, towers, arches, buttresses
and flying buttresses; it soared into the sky--carven saint above
carven saint, and gargoyles leering from every cranny. I could scarcely
believe that the faith of man had ever reared so lovely a thing. What a
power religion must have been in those days! Or what a grip this form
of art must have taken on the imagination of some! To what perfection
the art of architecture had attained! The loving care that has been
exercised in designing, shaping and placing these stones is enough
to stagger the brain. I did not wonder when I saw it that Ruskin and
Morris had attained to a sort of frenzy over the Gothic. It is a thing
for sighs and tears. Both Barfleur and I walked around it in reverent
silence, and I knew that he was rejoicing to know that I was feeling
what I ought to feel.

We went inside after a time because it was threatening dusk and we
had to make our train for Paris. I shall never forget the vast space
within those wondrous doors--the world of purple and gold and blue in
the windows, the blaze of a hundred and more candles upon the great
altar, the shrines with their votive offerings of flaming tapers, the
fat waddling mothers in bunchy skirts, the heavy priests with shovel
hats and pig-like faces, the order of attendant sisters in blue collars
and flaring linen headgear, the worshipful figures scattered here
and there upon the hard stone floor on their knees. The vast space
was full of a delicious incense; faint shadows were already pooling
themselves in the arches above to blend into a great darkness. Up rose
the columns, giant redwoods of stone, supporting the far-off roof; the
glory of pointed windows, the richness of foliated decorations, the
worshipfulness of graven saints set in shrines whose details seemed
the tendrils of spring. Whatever the flower, the fruit, the leaf, the
branch, could contribute in the way of artistic suggestion had here
been seized upon. Only the highest order of inspiration could have
conceived or planned or executed this delicious dream in stone.

A guide, for a franc or two, took us high up into the organ-loft
and out upon a narrow balustrade leading about the roof. Below, all
France was spread out; the city of Amiens, its contour, was defined
accurately. You could see some little stream, the Somme, coming into
the city and leaving it. Wonderful figures of saints and devils were on
every hand. We were shown a high tower in which a treaty between France
and Spain had been signed. I looked down into the great well of the
nave inside and saw the candles glowing like gold and the people moving
like small bugs across the floor. It was a splendid confirmation of the
majesty of man, the power of his ideals, the richness and extent of his
imagination, the sheer ability of his hands. I would not give up my
fleeting impression of Amiens for anything that I know.

       *       *       *       *       *

As we came away from the cathedral in the dusk we walked along some
branch or canal of the Somme, and I saw for the first time the
peculiar kind of boat or punt used on French streams--a long affair,
stub-pointed at either end. It was black and had somewhat the effect
of a gondola. A Frenchman in baggy corduroy trousers and soft wool
cap pulled over one ear was poling it along. It contained hay piled
in a rude mass. It was warm here, in spite of the fact that it was
the middle of January, and there was a feeling of spring in the air.
Barfleur informed me that the worst of winter in Paris appeared between
January fifteenth and the middle of March, that the spring did not
really show itself until the first of April or a little later.

“You will be coming back by then,” he said, “and you will see it in all
its glory. We will go to Fontainebleau and ride.” That sounded very
promising to me.

I could not believe that these dull cobble-stone streets through which
we were passing were part of a city of over ninety thousand, and that
there was much manufacturing here. There were so few people in sight.
It had a gray, shut-up appearance--none of the flow and spirit of the
towns of the American Middle West. It occurred to me at once that,
though I might like to travel here, I should never like to live here.
Then we reached the railway station again.




CHAPTER XXI

PARIS!


There is something about the French nation which, in spite of its
dreary-looking cities, exhibits an air of metropolitan up-to-dateness.
I don’t know where outside of America you will find the snap and
intensity of emotion, ambition, and romance which you find everywhere
in French streets. The station, when we returned to it, was alive
with a crowd of bustling, hurrying people, buying books and papers
at news-stands, looking after their luggage in the baggage-room, and
chattering to the ticket-sellers through their windows. A train from
Paris was just in and they were hurrying to catch that; and as I made
my first French purchase--twenty centimes’ worth of post-cards of
Amiens--our train rolled in. It was from the North--such a long train
as you frequently see in America, with cars labeled Milan, Trieste,
Marseilles, Florence, and Rome. I could hardly believe it, and asked
Barfleur as he bustled about seeing that the luggage was put in the
proper carriage, where it came from. He thought that some of these cars
started from St. Petersburg and others from Denmark and Holland. They
had a long run ahead of them yet--over thirty hours to Rome, and Paris
was just one point in their journey. We crowded into one car--stuffy
with luggage, its windows damp with human breath, various nationalities
occupying the section--and disposed of our grips, portmanteaus, rugs
and so on, as best we could. I slipped the bustling old _facteur_ a
franc--not so much because he deserved it, but because he had such a
gay and rakish air. His apron swung around his legs like a skirt, and
his accordion-plaited cap was lolling gaily over one ear. He waved me
a smiling farewell and said something in French which I wished I could
understand. Then I realized for the first time what a pity it is not to
understand the language of the country in which you are traveling.

As the train sped on through the dark to Paris I fell to speculating on
the wonders I was to see. Barfleur was explaining to me that in order
to make my entrance into Paris properly gay and interesting, we were
to dine at the Café de Paris and then visit the Folies-Bergère and
afterwards have supper at the Abbaye Thélème.

I should say here that of all people I know Barfleur is as capable
of creating an atmosphere as any--perhaps more so. The man lives
so heartily in his moods, he sets the stage for his actions long
beforehand, and then walks on like a good actor and plays his part
thoroughly. All the way over--from the very first day we met in New
York, I think--he was either consciously or unconsciously building up
for me the glamour of smart and artistic life in Europe. Now these
things are absolutely according to your capacity to understand and
appreciate them; they are, if you please, a figment of the brain, a
frame of mind. If you love art, if you love history, if the romance
of sex and beauty enthralls you, Europe in places presents tremendous
possibilities. To reach these ethereal paradises of charm, you must
skip and blink and dispense with many things. All the long lines
of commonplaces through which you journey must be as nothing. You
buy and prepare and travel and polish and finally you reach the
center of this thing which is so wonderful; and then, when you get
there, it is a figment of your own mind. Paris and the Riviera are
great realities--there are houses and crowds and people and great
institutions and the remembrance and flavor of great deeds; but the
thing that you get out of all this for yourself is born of the attitude
or mood which you take with you. Toward gambling, show, romance,
a delicious scene, Barfleur carries a special mood. Life is only
significant because of these things. His great struggle is to avoid
the dingy and the dull, and to escape if possible the penalties of
encroaching age. I think he looks back on the glitter of his youth with
a pathetic eye, and I know he looks forward into the dark with stoic
solemnity. Just one hour of beauty, is his private cry, one more day of
delight. Let the future take care of itself. He realizes, too, with the
keenness of a realist, that if youth is not most vivid in yourself, it
can sometimes be achieved through the moods of others. I know he found
in me a zest and a curiosity and a wonder which he was keen to satisfy.
Now he would see this thing over as he had seen it years before. He
would observe me thrill and marvel, and so he would be able to thrill
and marvel himself once more. He clung to me with delicious enthusiasm,
and every now and then would say, “Come now, what are you thinking?
I want to know. I am enjoying this as much as you are.” He had a
delicious vivacity which acted on me like wine.

As we neared Paris he had built this city up so thoroughly in my
mood that I am satisfied that I could not have seen it with a
realistic eye if I had tried. It was something--I cannot tell you
what--Napoleon, the Louvre, the art quarter, Montmartre, the gay
restaurants, the boulevards, Balzac, Hugo, the Seine and the soldiery,
a score and a hundred things too numerous to mention and all greatly
exaggerated. I hoped to see something which was perfect in its artistic
appearance--exteriorly speaking. I expected, after reading George Moore
and others, a wine-like atmosphere; a throbbing world of gay life;
women of exceptional charm of face and dress; the bizarre, the unique,
the emotional, the spirited. At Amiens I had seen enough women entering
the trains to realize that the dreary commonplace of the English woman
was gone. Instead the young married women that we saw were positively
daring compared to what England could show--shapely, piquant,
sensitive, their eyes showing a birdlike awareness of what this world
has to offer. I fancied Paris would be like that, only more so; and
as I look back on it now I can honestly say that I was not greatly
disappointed. It was not all that I thought it would be, but it was
enough. It is a gay, brilliant, beautiful city, with the spirit of New
York and more than the distinction of London. It is like a brilliant,
fragile child--not made for contests and brutal battles, but gay beyond
reproach.

When the train rolled into the Gare du Nord it must have been about
eight o’clock. Barfleur, as usual, was on the qui vive for precedence
and advantage. He had industriously piled all the bags close to the
door, and was hanging out of a window doing his best to signal a
facteur. I was to stay in the car and hand all the packages down
rapidly while he ran to secure a taxi and an inspector and in other
ways to clear away the impediments to our progress. With great
executive enthusiasm he told me that we must be at the Hotel Normandy
by eight-fifteen or twenty and that by nine o’clock we must be ready
to sit down in the Café de Paris to an excellent dinner which he had
ordered by telegraph.

I recall my wonder in entering Paris--the lack of any long extended
suburbs, the sudden flash of electric lights and electric cars. Mostly
we seemed to be entering through a tunnel or gully, and then we were
there. The noisy facteurs in their caps and blue jumpers were all
around the cars. They ran and chattered and gesticulated--so unlike
the porters in Paddington and Waterloo and Victoria and Euston. The one
we finally secured, a husky little enthusiast, did his best to gather
all our packages in one grand mass and shoulder them, stringing them on
a single strap. The result of it was that the strap broke right over a
small pool of water, and among other things the canvas bag containing
my blanket and magnificent shoes fell into the water. “Oh, my God,”
exclaimed Barfleur, “my hat box!”

“The fool ass,” I added, “I knew he would do just that--My blanket! My
shoes!”

The excited facteur was fairly dancing in anguish, doing his best to
get the packages strung together. Between us we relieved him of about
half of them, and from about his waist he unwrapped another large strap
and strung the remainder on that. Then we hurried on--for nothing would
do but that we must hurry. A taxi was secured and all our luggage piled
on it. It looked half suffocated under bundles as it swung out into the
street, and we were off at a mad clip through crowded, electric-lighted
streets. I pressed my nose to the window and took in as much as I
could, while Barfleur between calculations as to how much time this
would take, and that would take, and whether my trunk had arrived
safely, expatiated laconically on French characteristics.

“You smell this air--it is all over Paris.”

“The taxis always go like this.” (We were going like mad.)

“There is an excellent type--look at her.”

“Now you see the chairs out in front--they are that way all over Paris.”

I was looking at the interesting restaurant life which never really
seems to be interrupted anywhere in Paris. You can always find a dozen
chairs somewhere, if not fifty or a hundred, out on the sidewalk under
the open sky, or a glass roof--little stone-topped tables beside them,
the crowd surging to and fro in front. Here you can sit and have your
coffee, your liqueur, your sandwich. Everybody seems to do it--it is as
common as walking in the streets.

We whirled through street after street partaking of this atmosphere,
and finally swung up in front of a rather plain hotel which, I learned
this same night, was close to the Avenue de l’Opéra, on the corner of
the Rue St. Honoré and the Rue de l’Echelle. Our luggage was quickly
distributed and I was shown into my room by a maid who could not speak
English. I unlocked my belongings and was rapidly changing my clothes
when Barfleur, breathing mightily, fully arrayed, appeared to say that
I should await him at the door below where he would arrive with two
guests. I did so, and in fifteen minutes he returned, the car spinning
up out of a steady stream that was flowing by. I think my head was
dizzy with the whirl of impressions which I was garnering, but I did my
best to keep a sane view of things, and to get my impressions as sharp
and clear as I could.

I am quite satisfied of one thing in this world, and that is that
the commonest intelligence is very frequently confused or hypnotized
or overpersuaded by certain situations, and that the weaker ones are
ever full of the wildest forms of illusion. We talk about the sanity
of life--I question whether it exists. Mostly it is a succession of
confusing, disturbing impressions which are only rarely valid. This
night I know I was moving in a sort of maze, and when I stepped into
the car and was introduced to the two girls who were with Barfleur, I
easily succumbed to what was obviously their great beauty.

The artist Greuze has painted the type that I saw before me over
and over--soft, buxom, ruddy womanhood. I think the two may have
been twenty-four and twenty-six. The elder was smaller than the
younger--although both were of good size--and not so ruddy; but they
were both perfectly plump, round-faced, dimpled, and with a wealth of
brownish-black hair, even white teeth, smooth plump arms and necks and
shoulders. Their chins were adorably rounded, their lips red, and their
eyes laughing and gay. They began laughing and chattering the moment I
entered, extending their soft white hands and saying things in French
which I could not understand. Barfleur was smiling--beaming through
his monocle in an amused, superior way. The older girl was arrayed in
pearl-colored silk with a black mantilla spangled with silver, and
the younger had a dress of peach-blow hue with a white lace mantilla
also spangled, and they breathed a faint perfume. We were obviously in
beautiful, if not moral, company.

I shall never forget the grand air with which this noble company
entered the Café de Paris. Barfleur was in fine feather and the ladies
radiated a charm and a flavor which immediately attracted attention.
This brilliant café was aglow with lights and alive with people. It is
not large in size--quite small in fact--and triangular in shape. The
charm of it comes not so much from the luxury of the fittings, which
are luxurious enough, but from their exceeding good taste, and the fame
of the cuisine. One does not see a bill of fare here that indicates
prices. You order what you like and are charged what is suitable.
Champagne is not an essential wine as it is in some restaurants--you
may drink what you like. There is a delicious sparkle and spirit to the
place which can only spring from a high sense of individuality. Paris
is supposed to provide nothing better than the Café de Paris, in so far
as food is concerned. It is as good a place to go for dinner as the
city provides.

It amuses me now when I think of how the managerial ability of Barfleur
had been working through all this. As the program had been arranged in
his mind, I was to take the elder of the two ladies as my partner and
he had reserved the younger for himself. As a matter of fact they were
really equally pretty and charming--and I was interested in both until,
after a few parleys and when I had exchanged a few laughing signs with
the younger, he informed me that she was really closely tied up with
some one else and was not available. This I really did not believe;
but it did not make any particular difference. I turned my attention
to the elder who was quite as vivacious, if not quite so forceful as
her younger sister. I never knew what it meant before to sit in a
company of this kind, welcome as a friend, looked to for gaiety as a
companion and admirer, and yet not able to say a word in the language
of the occasion. There were certain words which could be quickly
acquired on an occasion of this kind, such as “beautiful,” “charming,”
“very delightful,” and so on, for which Barfleur gave me the French
equivalent, and then I could make complimentary remarks which he would
translate for all, and the ladies would say things in reply which
would come to me by the same medium. It went gaily enough--for the
conversation would not have been of a high order if I had been able
to speak French. Barfleur objected to being used constantly as an
interpreter, and when he became stubborn and chattered gaily without
stopping to explain, I was compelled to fall back on the resources of
looks and smiles and gestures. It interested me to see how quick these
women were to adapt themselves to the difficulties of the situation.
They were constantly laughing and chaffing between themselves--looking
at me and saying obviously flattering things, and then laughing at my
discomfiture in not being able to understand. The elder explained what
certain objects were by lifting them up and insisting on the French
name. Barfleur was constantly telling me of the compliments they made
and how sad they thought it was that I could not speak French. We
departed finally for the Folies-Bergère where the newest sensation of
Paris, Mistinguett, was playing. She proved to be a brilliant hoyden to
look upon; a gay, slim, yellow-haired tomboy who seemed to fascinate
the large audience by her boyish manners and her wayward air. There
was a brilliant chorus in spangled silks and satins, and finally a
beautiful maiden without any clothing at all who was cloaked by the
soldiery of the stage before she had half crossed it. The vaudeville
acts were about as good as they are anywhere. I did not think that the
performance was any better than one might see in one or two places in
New York, but of course the humor was much broader. Now and then one
of their remarkable _bons mots_ was translated for me by Barfleur just
to give me an inkling of the character of the place. Back of the seats
was a great lobby or promenade where a fragment of the demi-monde of
Paris was congregated--beautiful creatures, in many instances, and
as unconventional as you please. I was particularly struck with the
smartness of their costumes and the cheerful character of their faces.
The companion type in London and New York is somewhat colder-looking.
Their eyes snapped with Gallic intelligence, and they walked as though
the whole world held their point of view and no other.

From here at midnight we left for the Abbaye Thélème; and there I
encountered the best that Paris has to show in the way of that gaiety
and color and beauty and smartness for which it is famous. One really
ought to say a great deal about the Abbaye Thélème, because it is the
last word, the quintessence of midnight excitement and international
_savoir faire_. The Russian and the Brazilian, the Frenchman, the
American, the Englishman, the German and the Italian all meet here
on common ground. I saw much of restaurant life in Paris while I was
there, but nothing better than this. Like the Café de Paris it was
small--very small--when compared to restaurants of similar repute
in New York and London. I fancy it was not more than sixty feet
square--only it was not square but pentagonal, almost circular. The
tables, to begin with, went round the walls, with seats which had the
wall for a back; and then, as the guests poured in, the interior space
was filled up with tables which were brought in for the purpose; and,
later in the morning, when the guests began to leave, these tables were
taken out again, and the space devoted to dancing and entertainers.

As in the Café de Paris I noticed that it was not so much the quality
of the furnishings as the spirit of the place which was important.
This latter was compounded of various elements--success, perfection
of service, absolute distinction of cooking, and lastly the subtlety
and magnetism of sex which is capitalized and used in Paris as it is
nowhere else in the world. I never actually realized until I stepped
into this restaurant what it is that draws a certain moneyed element
to Paris. The Tomb of Napoleon and the Panthéon and the Louvre are
not the significant attractions of that important city. Those things
have their value--they constitute an historical and artistic element
that is appealing, romantic and forceful. But over and above that
there is something else--and that is sex. I did not learn what I am
going to say now until later, but it might as well be said here, for
it illustrates the point exactly. A little experience and inquiry
in Paris quickly taught me that the owners and managers of the more
successful restaurants encourage and help to sustain a certain type
of woman whose presence is desirable. She must be young, beautiful,
or attractive, and above all things possessed of temperament. A woman
can rise in the café and restaurant world of Paris quite as she can
on the stage; and she can easily graduate from the Abbaye Thélème and
Maxim’s to the stage, though the path is villainous. On the other
hand, the stage contributes freely to the atmosphere of Maxim’s, the
Abbaye Thélème, and other restaurants of their kind. A large number of
the figures seen here and at the Folies-Bergère and other places of
the same type, are interchangeable. They are in the restaurants when
they are not on the stage, and they are on the stage when they are not
in the restaurants. They rise or fall by a world of strange devices,
and you can hear brilliant or ghastly stories illustrating either
conclusion. Paris--this aspect of it--is a perfect maelstrom of sex;
and it is sustained by the wealth and the curiosity of the stranger, as
well as the Frenchman.

The Abbaye Thélème on this occasion presented a brilliant scene.
The carpet, as I recall it, was a rich green velvet; the walls a
lavender-white. From the ceiling six magnificently prismed electroliers
were suspended--three glowing with a clear peach-blow hue and three
with a brilliant white. Outside a small railing near the door several
negro singers, a mandolin and a guitar-player, several stage dancers,
and others were congregated. A perfect storm of people was pouring
through the doors--all with their tables previously arranged for. Out
in the lobby, where a January wind was blowing, you could hear a wild
uproar of slamming taxi doors, and the calls of doormen and chauffeurs
getting their vehicles in and out of the way. The company generally,
as on all such occasions, was on the qui vive to see who else were
present and what the general spirit of the occasion was to be.
Instantly I detected a number of Americans; three amazingly beautiful
English women, such as I never saw in England, and their escorts; a few
Spaniards or South Americans; and, after that, a variety of individuals
whom I took to be largely French, although it was impossible to tell.
The English women interested me because, during all my stay in Europe,
I never saw three other women quite so beautiful, and because, during
all my stay in England, I scarcely saw a good-looking English woman.
Barfleur suggested that they were of that high realm of fashion which
rarely remains in London during the winter season--when I was there;
that if I came again in May or June and went to the races I would see
plenty of them. Their lovely hair was straw-colored and their cheeks
and foreheads a faint pink and cream. Their arms and shoulders were
delightfully bare, and they carried themselves with amazing hauteur.
By one o’clock, when the majority of the guests had arrived, this room
fairly shimmered with white silks and satins, white arms and shoulders,
roses in black hair and blue and lavender ribbons fastened about
coiffures of lighter complexion. There were jewels in plenty--opals and
amethysts and turquoises and rubies--and there was a perfect artillery
of champagne corks. Every table was attended by its silver bucket
of ice; and the mandolins and guitars in their crowded angle were
strumming mightily.

I speculated interestedly as we seated ourselves as to what drew all
these people from all parts of the world to see this, to be here
together. Barfleur was eager to come here first and to have me see
this, without delay. I do not know where you could go, and for a
hundred francs see more of really amazing feminine beauty. I do not
know where for the same money you could buy the same atmosphere of
lightness and gaiety and enthusiasm. This place was fairly vibrating
with a wild desire to live. I fancy the majority of those who were
here for the first time--particularly of the young--would tell you
that they would rather be here than in any other spot you could name.
The place had a peculiar glitter of beauty which was compounded by
the managers with great skill. The waiters were all of them deft,
swift, suave, good-looking; the dancers who stepped out on the floor
after a few moments were of an orchid-like Spanish type--ruddy, brown,
full-bodied, black-haired, black-eyed. They had on dresses that were as
close fitting as the scales of a fish and that glittered with the same
radiance. They waved and rattled and clashed castanets and tambourines
and danced wildly and sinuously to and fro among the tables. Some of
them sang, or voices accompanied them from the raised platform devoted
to music.

After a while red, blue, pink and green balloons were introduced,
anchored to the champagne bottles, and allowed to float gaily in the
air. Paper parcels of small paste balls of all colors, as light as
feathers, were distributed for the guests to throw at one another. In
ten minutes a wild artillery battle was raging. Young girls were up
on their feet, their hands full of these colored weapons, pelting the
male strangers of their selection. You would see tall Englishmen and
Americans exchanging a perfect volley of colored spheres with girls of
various nationalities, laughing, chattering, calling, screaming. The
cocotte in all her dazzling radiance was here--exquisitely dressed, her
white arms shimmering, perfectly willing to strike up an understanding
with the admirer who was pelting her.

After a time, when the audience had worn itself through fever and
frenzy to satisfaction or weariness, or both, a few of the tables
were cleared away and the dancing began, occasional guests joining.
There were charming dances in costume from Russia, from Scotland,
from Hungary, and from Spain. I had the wonder of seeing an American
girl rise from her table and dance with more skill and grace than the
employed talent. A wine-enthused Englishman took the floor, a handsome
youth of twenty-six or eight, and remained there gaily prancing about
from table to table, dancing alone or with whomsoever would welcome
him. What looked like a dangerous argument started at one time because
some high-mettled Brazilian considered that he had been insulted. A
cordon of waiters and the managers soon adjusted that. It was between
three and four in the morning when we finally left; and I was very
tired.

It was decided that we should meet for dinner; and since it was almost
daylight I was glad when we had seen our ladies to their apartment and
returned to the hotel.




CHAPTER XXII

A MORNING IN PARIS


I shall never forget my first morning in Paris--the morning that I
woke up after about two hours’ sleep or less, prepared to put in a
hard day at sight-seeing because Barfleur had a program which must be
adhered to, and because he could only be with me until Monday, when
he had to return. It was a bright day, fortunately, a little hazy and
chill, but agreeable. I looked out of the window of my very comfortable
room on the fifth floor which gave out on a balcony overhanging the
Rue St. Honoré, and watched the crowd of French people below coming
to shop or to work. It would be hard to say what makes the difference
between a crowd of Englishmen and a crowd of Frenchmen, but there is a
difference. It struck me that these French men and women walked faster
and that their every movement was more spirited than either that of
the English or the Americans. They looked more like Americans, though,
than like the English; and they were much more cheerful than either,
chatting and talking as they came. I was interested to see whether I
could make the maid understand that I wanted coffee and rolls without
talking French, but the wants of American travelers are an old story
to French maids; and no sooner did I say _café_ and make the sign of
drinking from a cup than she said, “Oh, oui, oui, oui--oh, oui, oui,
oui!” and disappeared. Presently the coffee was brought me--and rolls
and butter and hot milk; and I ate my breakfast as I dressed.

About nine o’clock Barfleur arrived with his program. I was to walk in
the Tuileries--which is close at hand--while he got a shave. We were
to go for a walk in the Rue de Rivoli as far as a certain bootmaker’s,
who was to make me a pair of shoes for the Riviera. Then we were to
visit a haberdasher’s or two; and after that go straight about the
work of sight-seeing--visiting the old bookstalls on the Seine, the
churches of St. Étienne-du-Mont, Notre-Dame, Sainte-Chapelle, stopping
at Foyot’s for lunch; and thereafter regulating our conduct by the
wishes of several guests who were to appear--Miss N. and Mr. McG., two
neo-impressionist artists, and a certain Mme. de B., who would not mind
showing me around Paris if I cared for her company.

We started off quite briskly, and my first adventure in Paris led me
straight to the gardens of the Tuileries, lying west of the Louvre.
If any one wanted a proper introduction to Paris, I should recommend
this above all others. Such a noble piece of gardening as this is the
best testimony France has to offer of its taste, discrimination, and
sense of the magnificent. I should say, on mature thought, that we
shall never have anything like it in America. We have not the same
lightness of fancy. And, besides, the Tuileries represents a classic
period. I recall walking in here and being struck at once with the
magnificent proportions of it all--the breadth and stately lengths
of its walks, the utter wonder and charm of its statuary--snow-white
marble nudes standing out on the green grass and marking the circles,
squares and paths of its entire length. No such charm and beauty could
be attained in America because we would not permit the public use of
the nude in this fashion. Only the fancy of a monarch could create a
realm such as this; and the Tuileries and the Place du Carrousel and
the Place de la Concorde and the whole stretch of lovely tree-lined
walks and drives that lead to the Arc de Triomphe and give into the
Bois de Boulogne speak loudly of a noble fancy untrammeled by the
dictates of an inartistic public opinion. I was astonished to find how
much of the heart of Paris is devoted to public usage in this manner.
It corresponds, in theory at least, to the space devoted to Central
Park in New York--but this is so much more beautiful, or at least it
is so much more in accord with the spirit of Paris. These splendid
walks, devoted solely to the idling pedestrian, and set with a hundred
sculptural fancies in marble, show the gay, pleasure-loving character
of the life which created them. The grand monarchs of France knew what
beauty was, and they had the courage and the taste to fulfil their
desires. I got just an inkling of it all in the fifteen minutes that I
walked here in the morning sun, waiting for Barfleur to get his shave.

From here we went to a Paris florist’s where Madame pinned bright
_boutonnières_ on our coats, and thence to the bootmaker’s where Madame
again assisted her husband in the conduct of his business. Everywhere
I went in Paris I was struck by this charming unity in the conduct of
business between husband and wife and son and daughter. We talk much
about the economic independence of women in America. It seems to me
that the French have solved it in the only way that it can be solved.
Madame helps her husband in his business and they make a success of
it together. Monsieur Galoyer took the measurements for my shoes, but
Madame entered them in a book; and to me the shop was fifty times
as charming for her presence. She was pleasingly dressed, and the
shop looked as though it had experienced the tasteful touches of a
woman’s hand. It was clean and bright and smart, and smacked of good
housekeeping; and this was equally true of bookstalls, haberdashers’
shops, art-stores, coffee-rooms, and places of public sale generally.
Wherever Madame was, and she looked nice, there was a nice store; and
Monsieur looked as fat and contented as could reasonably be expected
under the circumstances.

[Illustration: The French have made much of the Seine]

From Galoyer’s we struck forth to Paris proper, its most interesting
features, and I recall now with delight how fresh and trig and spick it
all seemed. Paris has an air, a presence, from the poorest quarter of
the Charenton district to the perfections of the Bois and the region
about the Arc de Triomphe. It chanced that the day was bright and I saw
the Seine, as bright as new buttons glimmering over the stones of its
shallow banks and racing madly. If not a majestic stream it is at least
a gay and dashing one--quick-tempered, rapid-flowing, artistically
walled, crossed by a score of handsome bridges, and ornamented in every
possible way. How much the French have made of so little in the way
of a river! It is not very wide--about one-half as wide as the Thames
at Blackfriars Bridge and not so wide as the Harlem River which makes
Manhattan an island. I followed it from city wall to city wall one day,
from Charenton to Issy, and found every inch of it delightful. I was
never tired of looking at the wine barges near Charenton; the little
bathing pavilions and passenger boats in the vicinity of the Louvre;
the brick-barges, hay-barges, coal-barges and Heaven knows what else
plying between the city’s heart and points downstream past Issy. It
gave me the impression of being one of the brightest, cleanest rivers
in the world--a river on a holiday. I saw it once at Issy at what is
known in Paris as the “green hour”--which is five o’clock--when the
sun was going down and a deep palpable fragrance wafted from a vast
manufactory of perfume filled the air. Men were poling boats of hay and
laborers in their great wide-bottomed corduroy trousers, blue shirts
and inimitable French caps, were trudging homewards, and I felt as
though the world had nothing to offer Paris which it did not already
have--even the joy of simple labor amid great beauty. I could have
settled in a small house in Issy and worked as a laborer in a perfume
factory, carrying my dinner pail with me every morning, with a right
good-will--or such was the mood of the moment.

This morning, on our way to St.-Étienne-du-Mont and the cathedral, we
examined the bookstalls along the Seine and tried to recall off-hand
the interesting comment that had been made on them by great authors and
travelers. My poor wit brought back only the references of Balzac; but
Barfleur was livelier with thoughts from Rousseau to George Moore. They
have a magnificent literary history; but it is only because they are on
the banks of the Seine, in the center of this whirling pageant of life,
that they are so delighted. To enjoy them one has to be in an idle mood
and love out-of-doors; for they consist of a dusty row of four-legged
boxes with lids coming quite to your chest in height, and reminding one
of those high-legged counting-tables at which clerks sit on tall stools
making entries in their ledgers. These boxes are old and paintless and
weather-beaten; and at night the very dusty-looking keepers, who from
early morning until dark have had their shabby-backed wares spread out
where dust and sunlight and wind and rain can attack them, pack them in
the body of the box on which they are lying and close the lid. You can
always see an idler or two here--perhaps many idlers--between the Quai
d’Orsay and the Quai Voltaire.

We made our way through the Rue Mazarin and Rue de l’Ancienne Comédie
into that region which surrounds the École de Medecin and the
Luxembourg. In his enthusiastic way Barfleur tried to indicate to
me that I was in the most historic section of the left bank of the
Seine, where were St.-Étienne-du-Mont, the Panthéon, the Sorbonne,
the Luxembourg, the École des Beaux-Arts and the Latin Quarter. We
came for a little way into the Boulevard St.-Michel, and there I saw
my first artists in velvet suits, long hair, and broad-brimmed hats;
but I was told that they were poseurs--the kind of artist who is so by
profession, not by accomplishment. They were poetic-looking youths--the
two that I saw swinging along together--with pale faces and slim hands.
I was informed that the type had almost entirely disappeared and that
the art student of to-day prefers to be distinctly inconspicuous.
From what I saw of them later I can confirm this; for the schools
which I visited revealed a type of boy and girl who, while being
romantic enough, in all conscience, were nevertheless inconspicuously
dressed and very simple and off-hand in their manner. I visited this
region later with artists who had made a name for themselves in the
radical world, and with students who were hoping to make a name for
themselves--sitting in their cafés, examining their studios, and
sensing the atmosphere of their streets and public amusements. There is
an art atmosphere, strong and clear, compounded of romance, emotion,
desire, love of beauty and determination of purpose, which is thrilling
to experience--even vicariously.

Paris is as young in its mood as any city in the world. It is as wildly
enthusiastic as a child. I noticed here, this morning, the strange
fact of old battered-looking fellows singing to themselves, which I
never noticed anywhere else in this world. Age sits lightly on the
Parisian, I am sure; and youth is a mad fantasy, an exciting realm
of romantic dreams. The Parisian--from the keeper of a market-stall
to the prince of the money world, or of art--wants to live gaily,
briskly, laughingly, and he will not let the necessity of earning his
living deny him. I felt it in the churches, the depots, the department
stores, the theaters, the restaurants, the streets--a wild, keen desire
for life with the blood and the body to back it up. It must be in the
soil and the air, for Paris sings. It is like poison in the veins, and
I felt myself growing positively giddy with enthusiasm. I believe that
for the first six months Paris would be a disease from which one would
suffer greatly and recover slowly. After that you would settle down to
live the life you found there in contentment and with delight; but you
would not be in so much danger of wrecking your very mortal body and
your uncertainly immortal soul.

I was interested in this neighborhood, as we hurried through and away
from it to the Ile-de-la-Cité and Notre-Dame, as being not only a
center for art strugglers of the Latin Quarter, but also for students
of the Sorbonne. I was told that there were thousands upon thousands of
them from various countries--eight thousand from Russia alone. How they
live my informant did not seem to know, except that in the main they
lived very badly. Baths, clean linen, and three meals a day, according
to him, were not at all common; and in the majority of instances they
starve their way through, going back to their native countries to take
up the practice of law, medicine, politics and other professions. After
Oxford and the American universities, this region and the Sorbonne
itself, I found anything but attractive.

The church of St.-Étienne-du-Mont is as fine as possible, a type of
the kind of architecture which is no type and ought to have a new
name--modern would be as good as any. It has a creamish-gray effect,
exceedingly ornate, with all the artificery of a jewel box.

The Panthéon seemed strangely bare to me, large and spacious but cold.
The men who are not there as much as the men who are, made it seem
somewhat unrepresentative to me as a national mausoleum. It is hard to
make a national burying-ground that will appeal to all.

Notre-Dame after Canterbury and Amiens seems a little heavy but
as contrasted with St. Paul’s in London and anything existing in
America, it seemed strangely wonderful. I could not help thinking of
Hugo’s novel and of St. Louis and Napoleon and the French Revolution
in connection with it. It is so heavy and somber and so sadly
great. The Hôtel Dieu, the Palais de Justice, Sainte-Chapelle and
the Pont-Saint-Michel all in the same neighborhood interested me
much, particularly Sainte-Chapelle--to me one of the most charming
exteriors and interiors I saw in Paris. It is exquisite--this chapel
which was once the scene of the private prayers of a king. This whole
neighborhood somehow--from the bookstalls to Sainte-Chapelle suggested
Balzac and Hugo and the flavor of this world as they presented it, was
in my mind.

And now there was luncheon at Foyot’s, a little restaurant near the
Luxembourg and the Musée de Cluny, where the wise in the matter of
food love to dine and where, as usual, Barfleur was at his best. The
French, while discarding show in many instances entirely, and allowing
their restaurant chambers to look as though they had been put together
with an effort, nevertheless attain a perfection of atmosphere which
is astonishing. For the life of me I could not tell why this little
restaurant seemed so bright, for there was nothing smart about it when
you examined it in detail; and so I was compelled to attribute this
impression to the probably all-pervading temperament of the owner.
Always, in these cases, there is a man (or a woman) quite remarkable
for his point of view. Otherwise you could not take such simple
appointments and make them into anything so pleasing and so individual.
A luncheon which had been ordered by telephone was now served; and at
the beginning of its gastronomic wonders Mr. McG. and Miss N. arrived.

I shall not soon forget the interesting temperaments of these two; for
even more than great institutions, persons who come reasonably close
to you make up the atmosphere of a city. Mr. McG. was a solid, sandy,
steady-eyed Scotchman who looked as though, had he not been an artist,
he might have been a kilted soldier, swinging along with the enviable
Scotch stride. Miss N. was a delightfully Parisianized American,
without the slightest affectation, however, so far as I could make out,
of either speech or manner. She was pleasingly good-looking, with black
hair, a healthy, rounded face and figure, and a cheerful, good-natured
air. There was no sense of either that aggressiveness or superiority
which so often characterizes the female artist. We launched at once
upon a discussion of Paris, London and New York and upon the delights
of Paris and the progress of the neo-impressionist cult. I could see
plainly that these two did not care to force their connection with
that art development on my attention; but I was interested to know of
it. There was something so solid and self-reliant about Mr. McG. that
before the meal was over I had taken a fancy to him. He had the least
suggestion of a Scotch burr in his voice which might have said “awaw”
instead of away and “doon” instead of down; but it resulted in nothing
so broad as that. They immediately gave me lists of restaurants that
I must see in the Latin Quarter and asked me to come with them to the
Café d’Harcourt and to Bullier’s to dance and to some of the brasseries
to see what they were like. Between two and three Mr. McG. left because
of an errand, and Barfleur and I accompanied Miss N. to her studio
close by the gardens of the Luxembourg. This public garden which, not
unlike the Tuileries on the other side of the Seine, was set with
charming statues, embellished by a magnificent fountain, and alive
with French nursemaids and their charges, idling Parisians in cutaways
and derbies, and a smart world of pedestrians generally impressed me
greatly. It was lovely. The wonder of Paris, as I was discovering, was
that, walk where you would, it was hard to escape the sense of breadth,
space, art, history, romance and a lovely sense of lightness and
enthusiasm for life.

Miss N.’s studio is in the Rue Deñfert-Rochereau. In calling here I had
my first taste of the Paris concierge, the janitress who has an eye on
all those who come and go and to whom all not having keys must apply.
In many cases, as I learned, keys are not given to the outer gate or
door. One must ring and be admitted. This gives this person a complete
espionage over the affairs of all the tenants, mail, groceries, guests,
purchases, messages--anything and everything. If you have a charming
concierge, it is well and good; if not, not. The thought of anything so
offensive as a spying concierge irritated me greatly and I found myself
running forward in my mind picking fights with some possible concierge
who might at some remote date possibly trouble me. Of such is the
contentious disposition.

The studio of Mr. McG., in the Boulevard Raspail, overlooks a lovely
garden--a heavenly place set with trees and flowers and reminiscent
of an older day in the bits of broken stone-work lying about, and
suggesting the architecture of a bygone period. His windows, reaching
from floor to ceiling and supplemented by exterior balconies, were
overhung by trees. In both studios were scores of canvases done in the
neo-impressionistic style which interested me profoundly.

It is one thing to see neo-impressionism hung upon the walls of a
gallery in London, or disputed over in a West End residence. It is
quite another to come upon it fresh from the easel in the studio of
the artist, or still in process of production, defended by every
thought and principle of which the artist is capable. In Miss N.’s
studio were a series of decorative canvases intended for the walls of
a great department store in America which were done in the raw reds,
yellows, blues and greens of the neo-impressionist cult--flowers which
stood out with the coarse distinctness of hollyhocks and sunflowers;
architectural outlines which were as sharp as those of rough buildings,
and men and women whose details of dress and feature were characterized
by colors which by the uncultivated eye would be pronounced unnatural.

For me they had an immense appeal if for nothing more than that they
represented a development and an individual point of view. It is so
hard to break tradition.

It was the same in the studio of Mr. McG. to which we journeyed after
some three-quarters of an hour. Of the two painters, the man seemed to
me the more forceful. Miss N. worked in a softer mood, with more of
what might be called an emotional attitude towards life.

During all this, Barfleur was in the heyday of his Parisian glory, and
appropriately cheerful. We took a taxi through singing streets lighted
by a springtime sun and came finally to the Restaurant Prunier where it
was necessary for him to secure a table and order dinner in advance;
and thence to the Théâtre des Capucines in the Rue des Capucines, where
tickets for a farce had to be secured, and thence to a bar near the
Avenue de l’Opéra where we were to meet the previously mentioned Mme.
de B. who, out of the goodness of her heart, was to help entertain me
while I was in the city.

This remarkable woman who by her beauty, simplicity, utter frankness,
and moody immorality would shock the average woman into a deadly fear
of life and make a horror of what seems a gaudy pleasure world to
some, quite instantly took my fancy. Yet I think it was more a matter
of Mme. de B.’s attitude, than it was the things which she did, which
made it so terrible. But that is a long story.

[Illustration: One of the thousands upon thousands of cafés on the
boulevards of Paris]

We came to her out of the whirl of the “green hour,” when the Paris
boulevards in this vicinity were fairly swarming with people--the
gayest world I have ever seen. We have enormous crowds in New York,
but they seem to be going somewhere very much more definitely than
in Paris. With us there is an eager, strident, almost objectionable
effort to get home or to the theater or to the restaurant which one can
easily resent--it is so inconsiderate and indifferent. In London you
do not feel that there are any crowds that are going to the theaters
or the restaurants; and if they are, they are not very cheerful about
it; they are enduring life; they have none of the lightness of the
Parisian world. I think it is all explained by the fact that Parisians
feel keenly that they are living now and that they wish to enjoy
themselves as they go. The American and the Englishman--the Englishman
much more than the American--have decided that they are going to live
in the future. Only the American is a little angry about his decision
and the Englishman a little meek or patient. They both feel that life
is intensely grim. But the Parisian, while he may feel or believe it,
decides wilfully to cast it off. He lives by the way, out of books,
restaurants, theaters, boulevards, and the spectacle of life generally.
The Parisians move briskly, and they come out where they can see each
other--out into the great wide-sidewalked boulevards and the thousands
upon thousands of cafés; and make themselves comfortable and talkative
and gay on the streets. It is so obvious that everybody is having
a good time--not trying to have it; that they are enjoying the
wine-like air, the cordials and _apéritifs_ of the _brasseries_, the
net-like movements of the cabs, the dancing lights of the roadways, and
the flare of the shops. It may be chill or drizzling in Paris, but you
scarcely feel it. Rain can scarcely drive the people off the streets.
Literally it does not. There are crowds whether it rains or not, and
they are not despondent. This particular hour that brought us to G.’s
Bar was essentially thrilling, and I was interested to see what Mme. de
B. was like.




CHAPTER XXIII

THREE GUIDES


It was only by intuition, and by asking many questions, that at times
I could extract the significance of certain places from Barfleur as
quickly as I wished. He was always reticent or a little cryptic in his
allusions. In this instance I gathered rapidly however that this bar
was a very extraordinary little restaurant presided over by a woman
of a most pleasant and practical type. She could not have been much
over forty--buxom, good-looking, self-reliant, efficient. She moved
about the two rooms which constituted her restaurant, in so far as
the average diner was concerned, with an air of considerable social
importance. Her dresses, as I noticed on my several subsequent visits,
were always sober, but in excellent taste. About this time of day the
two rooms were a little dark, the electric lights being reserved for
the more crowded hours. Yet there were always a few people here. This
evening when we entered I noticed a half-dozen men and three or four
young women lounging here in a preliminary way, consuming _apéritifs_
and chatting sociably. I made out by degrees that the mistress of this
place had a following of a kind, in the Parisian scheme of things--that
certain men and women came here for reasons of good-fellowship; and
that she would take a certain type of struggling maiden, if she were
good-looking and ambitious and smart, under her wing. The girl would
have to know how to dress well, to be able to carry herself with an
air; and when money was being spent very freely by an admirer it might
as well be spent at this bar on occasion as anywhere else. There was
obviously an _entente cordiale_ between Madame G. and all the young
women who came in here. They seemed so much at home that it was quite
like a family party. Everybody appeared to be genial, cheerful, and to
know everybody else. To enter here was to feel as though you had lived
in Paris for years.

While we are sitting at a table sipping a brandy and soda, enter Mme.
de B., the brisk, genial, sympathetic French personage whose voice
on the instant gave me a delightful impression of her. It was the
loveliest voice I have ever heard, soft and musical, a colorful voice
touched with both gaiety and sadness. Her eyes were light blue, her
hair brown and her manner sinuous and insinuating. She seemed to have
the spirit of a delightfully friendly collie dog or child and all the
gaiety and alertness that goes with either.

After I had been introduced, she laughed, and putting aside her muff
and stole, shook herself into a comfortable position in a corner and
accepted a brandy and soda. She was so interested for the moment,
exchanging whys and wherefores with Barfleur, that I had a chance to
observe her keenly. In a moment she turned to me and wanted to know
whether I knew either of two American authors whom she knew--men of
considerable repute. Knowing them both very well, it surprised me
to think that she knew them. She seemed, from the way she spoke, to
have been on the friendliest terms with both of them; and any one by
looking at her could have understood why they should have taken such an
interest in her.

“Now, you know, that Mistaire N., he is very nice. I was very fond of
him. And Mistaire R., he is clever, don’t you think?”

I admitted at once that they were both very able men and that I was
glad that she knew them. She informed me that she had known Mr. R. and
Mr. N. in London and that she had there perfected her English, which
was very good indeed. Barfleur explained in full who I was and how long
I would be in Paris and that he had written her from America because he
wanted her to show me some attention during my stay in Paris.

If Mme. de B. had been of a somewhat more calculating type I fancy
that, with her intense charm of face and manner and her intellect and
voice, she would have been very successful. I gained the impression
that she had been on the stage in some small capacity; but she had been
too diffident--not really brazen enough--for the grim world in which
the French actress rises. I soon found that Mme. de B. was a charming
blend of emotion, desire, and refinement which had strayed into the
wrong field. She would have done better in literature or music or art;
and she seemed fitted by her moods and her understanding to be a light
in any one of them or all. Some temperaments are so--missing by a
fraction what they would give all the world to have. It is the little
things that do it--the fractions, the bits, the capacity for taking
pains in little things that make, as so many have said, the difference
between success and failure and it is true.

I shall never forget how she looked at me, quite in the spirit of a
gay uncertain child, and how quickly she made me feel that we would
get along very well together. “Why, yes,” she said quite easily in her
soft voice, “I will go about with you, although I would not know what
is best to see. But I shall be here, and if you want to come for me we
can see things together.” Suddenly she reached over and took my hand
and squeezed it genially, as though to seal the bargain. We had more
drinks to celebrate this rather festive occasion; and then Mme. de
B., promising to join us at the theater, went away. It was high time
then to dress for dinner; and so we returned to the hotel. We ate a
companionable meal, watching the Parisian and his lady love (or his
wife) arrive in droves and dine with that gusto and enthusiasm which is
so characteristic of the French.

When we came out of this theater at half after eleven, Mme. de B. was
anxious to return to her apartment, and Barfleur was anxious to give me
an extra taste of the varied café life of Paris in order that I might
be able to contrast and compare intelligently. “If you know where they
are and see whether you like them, you can tell whether you want to see
any more of them--which I hope you won’t,” said he wisely, leading the
way through a swirling crowd that was for all the world like a rushing
tide of the sea.

There are no traffic laws in Paris, so far as I could make out;
vehicles certainly have the right-of-way and they go like mad. I have
read of the Parisian authorities having imported a London policeman
to teach Paris police the art of traffic regulation, but if so, the
instruction has been wasted. This night was a bedlam of vehicles and
people. A Paris guide, one of the tribe that conducts the morbid
stranger through scenes that are supposedly evil, and that I know from
observation to be utterly vain, approached us in the Boulevard des
Capucines with the suggestion that he be allowed to conduct us through
a realm of filthy sights, some of which he catalogued. I could give a
list of them if I thought any human organization would ever print them,
or that any individual would ever care to read them--which I don’t. I
have indicated before that Barfleur is essentially clean-minded. He is
really interested in the art of the demi-mondaine, and the spectacle
which their showy and, to a certain extent, artistic lives present;
but no one in this world ever saw more clearly through the shallow
make-believe of this realm than he does. He contents himself with
admiring the art and the tragedy and the pathos of it. This world of
women interests him as a phase of the struggle for existence, and for
the artistic pretense which it sometimes compels. To him the vast
majority of these women in Paris were artistic--whatever one might
say for their morals, their honesty, their brutality and the other
qualities which they possess or lack; and whatever they were, life made
them so--conditions over which their temperaments, understandings and
wills had little or no control. He is an amazingly tolerant man--one
of the most tolerant I have ever known, and kindly in his manner and
intention.

Nevertheless, he has an innate horror of the purely physical when it
descends to inartistic brutality. There is much of that in Paris; and
these guides advertise it; but it is filth especially arranged for the
stranger. I fancy the average Parisian knows nothing about it; and if
he does, he has a profound contempt for it. So has the well-intentioned
stranger, but there is always an audience for this sort of thing.
So when this guide approached us with the proposition to show us a
selected line of vice, Barfleur took him genially in hand. “Stop a
moment, now,” he said, with his high hat on the back of his head, his
fur coat expansively open, and his monocled eye fixing the intruder
with an inquiring gaze, “tell me one thing--have you a mother?”

The small Jew who was the industrious salesman for this particular type
of ware looked his astonishment.

They are used to all sorts of set-backs--these particular guides--for
they encounter all sorts of people, severely moral and the reverse;
and I fancy on occasion they would be soundly trounced if it were not
for the police who stand in with them and receive a modicum for their
protection. They certainly learn to understand something of the type
of man who will listen to their proposition; for I have never seen
them more than ignored and I have frequently seen them talked to in an
off-hand way, though I was pleased to note that their customers were
few.

This particular little Jew had a quizzical, screwed-up expression on
his face, and did not care to answer the question at first; but resumed
his announcement of his various delights and the price it would all
cost.

“Wait, wait, wait,” insisted Barfleur, “answer my question. Have you a
mother?”

“What has that got to do with it?” asked the guide. “Of course I have a
mother.”

“Where is she?” demanded Barfleur authoritatively.

“She’s at home,” replied the guide, with an air of mingled
astonishment, irritation and a desire not to lose a customer.

“Does she know that you are out here on the streets of Paris doing what
you are doing to-night?” he continued with a very noble air.

The man swore under his breath.

“Answer me,” persisted Barfleur, still fixing him solemnly through his
monocle. “Does she?”

“Why, no, of course she doesn’t,” replied the Jew sheepishly.

“Would you want her to know?” This in sepulchral tones.

“No, I don’t think so.”

“Have you a sister?”

“Yes.”

“Would you want her to know?”

“I don’t know,” replied the guide defiantly. “She might know anyhow.”

“Tell me truly, if she did not know, would you want her to know?”

The poor vender looked as if he had got into some silly, inexplicable
mess from which he would be glad to free himself; but he did not seem
to have sense enough to walk briskly away and leave us. Perhaps he did
not care to admit defeat so easily.

“No, I suppose not,” replied the interrogated vainly.

“There you have it,” exclaimed Barfleur triumphantly. “You have a
mother--you would not want her to know. You have a sister--you would
not want her to know. And yet you solicit me here on the street to
see things which I do not want to see or know. Think of your poor
gray-headed mother,” he exclaimed grandiloquently, and with a mock
air of shame and sorrow. “Once, no doubt, you prayed at her knee, an
innocent boy yourself.”

The man looked at him in dull suspicion.

“No doubt if she saw you here to-night, selling your manhood for a
small sum of money, pandering to the lowest and most vicious elements
in life, she would weep bitter tears. And your sister--don’t you think
now you had better give up this evil life? Don’t you think you had
better accept any sort of position and earn an honest living rather
than do what you are doing?”

“Well, I don’t know,” said the man. “This living is as good as any
other living. I’ve worked hard to get my knowledge.”

“Good God, do you call this knowledge?” inquired Barfleur solemnly.

“Yes, I do,” replied the man. “I’ve worked hard to get it.”

[Illustration: These places were crowded with a gay and festive
throng]

“My poor friend,” replied Barfleur, “I pity you. From the bottom of my
heart I pity you. You are degrading your life and ruining your soul.
Come now, to-morrow is Sunday. The church bells will be ringing. Go to
church. Reform your life. Make a new start--do. You will never regret
it. Your old mother will be so glad--and your sister.”

“Oh, say,” said the man, walking off, “you don’t want a guide. You want
a church.” And he did not even look back.

“It is the only way I have of getting rid of them,” commented Barfleur.
“They always stop when I begin to talk to them about their mother. They
can’t stand the thought of their mother.”

“Very true,” I said. “Cut it out now, and come on. You have preached
enough. Let us see the worst that Paris has to show.” And off we went,
arm in arm.

Thereafter we visited restaurant after restaurant,--high, low, smart,
dull,-and I can say truly that the strange impression which this world
made on me lingers even now. Obviously, when we arrived at Fysher’s
at twelve o’clock, the fun was just getting under way. Some of these
places, like this Bar Fysher, were no larger than a fair-sized room in
an apartment, but crowded with a gay and festive throng--Americans,
South Americans, English and others. One of the tricks in Paris to
make a restaurant successful is to keep it small so that it has an
air of overflow and activity. Here at Fysher’s Bar, after allowing
room for the red-jacketed orchestra, the piano and the waiters, there
was scarcely space for the forty or fifty guests who were present.
Champagne was twenty francs the bottle and champagne was all they
served. It was necessary here, as at all the restaurants, to contribute
to the support of the musicians; and if a strange young woman should
sit at your table for a moment and share either the wine or the fruit
which would be quickly offered, you would have to pay for that. Peaches
were three francs each, and grapes five francs the bunch. It was plain
that all these things were offered in order that the house might thrive
and prosper. It was so at each and all of them.




CHAPTER XXIV

“THE POISON FLOWER”


It was after this night that Barfleur took his departure for London
for two weeks, where business affairs were calling him during which
time I was to make myself as idle and gay as I might alone or with the
individuals to whom he had introduced me or to whom I had introductions
direct. There was so much that I wished to see and that he did not care
to see over again with me, having seen it all before--the Musée de
Cluny, for instance, the Louvre, the Luxembourg and so on.

The next afternoon after a more or less rambling day I saw him off for
London and then I plunged into this treasure world alone.

One of the things that seriously impressed me was the never-failing
singing air of the city which was everywhere; and another the
peculiarly moody atmosphere of the cemetery of Père-Lachaise--that
wonderful world of celebrated dead--who crowd each other like the
residents of a narrow city and who make a veritable fanfare of names.
What a world! One whole day I idled here over the tombs of Balzac,
Daudet, De Musset, Chopin, Rachel, Abélard and Héloise--a long, long
list of celebrities. My brain fairly reeled with the futility of
life--and finally I came away immensely sad. Another day I visited
Versailles and all its splendor with one of the most interesting and
amusing Americans I met abroad, a publisher by the name of H----,
who regaled me with his own naïve experiences. I fairly choked at
times over his quaint, slangy, amusing comments on things as when at
Versailles, in the chambers of Marie Antoinette, he discovered a small
secret stair only to remark, “There’s where Louis XVI took a sneak
often enough no doubt,” or on one of the towers of Notre Dame when to
a third person who was present he commented, “There’s your gargoyles,
old sox!” Think of the artistic irreverence of it! Concerning a group
of buildings which related to the Beaux-Arts I believe he inquired,
“What’s the bunch of stuff to the right?” and so it went. But the
beauty of Versailles--its stately artificiality!--how it all comes back.

After two weeks in which I enjoyed myself as much as I ever hope to,
studying out the charm and color of Paris for myself, Barfleur returned
fresh, interested, ready for the Riviera, ready for more of Paris,
ready indeed for anything, I said to myself once more, when I saw
him--and I was very glad to see him indeed.

The personality of Barfleur supplies a homey quality of comfortable
companionship. He is so full of a youthful zest to live, and so keen
after the shows and customs of the world. I have never pondered why he
is so popular with women, or that his friends in different walks of
life constitute so great a company. He seems to have known thousands
of all sorts, and to be at home under all conditions. That persistent,
unchanging atmosphere of “All is well with me,” to maintain which is
as much a duty as a tradition with him, makes his presence a constant
delight.

We were soon joined by a small party of friends thereafter: Sir Scorp,
who was bound for an extended stay on the Riviera, a sociologist,
who was abroad on an important scientific investigation, and the
representative of an American publishing house, who was coming to
Paris to waylay Mr. Morgan Shuster, late of Persia, and secure his
book. This goodly company descended upon the Hotel Normandy late one
Friday afternoon; and it was planned that a party of the whole was to
be organized the following night to dine at the Café de Paris and then
to make a round of the lesser known and more picturesque of Parisian
resorts.

Before this grand pilgrimage to the temples of vice and excitement,
however, Barfleur and I spent a remarkable evening wandering from one
restaurant to another in an effort to locate a certain Mlle. Rillette,
a girl who, he had informed me when we first came to Paris, had been
one of the most interesting figures of the Folies stage. Four or five
years before she had held at the Folies-Bergère much the same position
now recently attained by Mistinguett who was just then enthralling
Paris--in other words, she was the sensation of that stormy world of
art and romance of which these restaurants are a part. She was more
than that. She had a wonderful mezzo-soprano voice of great color
and richness and a spirit for dancing that was Greek in its quality.
Barfleur was most anxious that I should get at least a glimpse of this
exceptional Parisian type--the real spirit of this fast world, your
true artistic poison flower, your lovely hooded cobra--before she
should be too old, or too wretched, to be interesting.

We started out to visit G.’s Bar, the Bar Fysher, the Rat Mort,
Palmyr’s Bar, the Grelot, the Rabelais, in fact the whole list of
restaurants and show-places where on occasion she might be expected to
be seen. On the way Barfleur recounted bits of her interesting history,
her marriages, divorces, vices, drug-habits, a strange category of
tendencies that sometimes affect the most vigorous and eager of human
temperaments.

At one café, on this expedition, quite by accident apparently, we
encountered Miss X., whom I had not seen since we left Fishguard, and
who was here in Paris doing her best to outvie the women of the gay
restaurants in the matter of her dresses, her hats, and her beauty. I
must say she presented a ravishing spectacle--quite as wonderful as any
of the other women who were to be seen here; but she lacked, as I was
to note, the natural vivacity of the French. We Americans, in spite of
our high spirits and our healthy enthusiasm for life, are nevertheless
a blend of the English, the German, and some of the sedate nations
of the north; and we are inclined to a physical and mental passivity
which is not common to the Latins. This Miss X., vivid creature that
she was, did not have the spiritual vibration which accompanies the
French women. So far as spirit was concerned, she seemed superior to
most of the foreign types present--but the French women are naturally
gayer, their eyes brighter, their motions lighter. She gave us at once
an account of her adventures since I had seen her--where she had been
living, what places she had visited, and what a good time she was
having. I could not help marveling at the disposition which set above
everything else in the world the privilege of moving in this peculiar
realm which fascinated her so much. From a conventional point of view,
much of what she did was, to say the least of it, unusual, but she
did not trouble about this. As she told me on the _Mauretania_, all
she hoped for was to become a woman of Machiavellian finesse, and to
have some money. If she had money and attained to real social wisdom,
conventional society could go to the devil; for the adventuress,
according to her, was welcome everywhere--that is, anywhere she would
care to go. She did not expect to retain her beauty entirely; but she
did expect to have some money, and meanwhile to live brilliantly as
she deemed that she was now doing. Her love of amusement was quite
as marked as ever, and her comments on the various women of her class
as hard and accurate as they were brilliant. I remember her saying of
one woman, with an easy sweep of her hand, “Like a willow, don’t you
think?”--and of another, “She glows like a ruby.” It was true--fine
character delineation.

At Maxim’s, an hour later, she decided to go home, so we took her to
her hotel and then resumed our pursuit of Mlle. Rillette. After much
wandering we finally came upon her, about four in the morning, in one
of those showy pleasure resorts that I have so frequently described.

“Ah, yes, there she is,” Barfleur exclaimed. I looked to a distant
table to see the figure he indicated--that of a young girl seemingly
not more than twenty-four or twenty-five, a white silk neckerchief tied
about her brown hair, her body clothed in a rather nondescript costume
for a world so showy as this. Most of the women wore evening clothes.
Rillette had on a skirt of light brown wool, a white shirtwaist open
in the front and the collar turned down showing her pretty neck. Her
skirt was short, and I noticed that she had pleasing ankles and pretty
feet and her sleeves were short, showing a solid forearm. Before she
noticed Barfleur we saw her take a slender girl in black for a partner
and dance, with others, in the open space between the tables which
circled the walls. I studied her with interest because of Barfleur’s
description, because of the fact that she had been married twice, and
because the physical and spiritual ruin of a dozen girls was, falsely
or not, laid at her door. Her face did not suggest the depravity which
her career would indicate, although it was by no means ruddy; but
she seemed to scorn rouge. Her eyes--eyes are always significant in
a forceful personage--were large and vague and brown, set beneath a
wide, full forehead--very wonderful eyes. She appeared, in her idle
security and profound nonchalance, like a figure out of the Revolution
or the Commune. She would have been magnificent in a riot--marching
up a Parisian street, her white band about her brown hair, carrying
a knife, a gun, or a flag. She would have had the courage, too; for
it was so plain that life had lost much of its charm and she nearly
all of her caring. She came over when her dance was done, having seen
Barfleur, and extended an indifferent hand. He told me, after their
light conversation in French, that he had chided her to the effect that
her career was ruining her once lovely voice. “I shall find it again at
the next corner,” she said, and walked smartly away.

“Some one should write a novel about a woman like that,” he explained
urgently. “She ought to be painted. It is amazing the sufficiency of
soul that goes with that type. There aren’t many like her. She could
be the sensation again of Paris if she wanted to--would try. But she
won’t. See what she said of her voice just now.” He shook his head.
I smiled approvingly, for obviously the appearance of the woman--her
full, rich eyes--bore him out.

She was a figure of distinction in this restaurant world; for many knew
her and kept track of her. I watched her from time to time talking with
the guests of one table and another, and the chemical content which
made her exceptional was as obvious as though she were a bottle and
bore a label. To this day she stands out in my mind in her simple dress
and indifferent manner as perhaps the one forceful, significant figure
that I saw in all the cafés of Paris or elsewhere.

[Illustration: I looked to a distant table to see the figure he
indicated]

I should like to add here, before I part forever with this curious and
feverish Parisian restaurant world, that my conclusion had been,
after much and careful observation, that it was too utterly feverish,
artificial and exotic not to be dangerous and grimly destructive if
not merely touched upon at long intervals. This world of champagne
drinkers was apparently interested in but two things--the flare and
glow of the restaurants, which were always brightly lighted and packed
with people--and women. In the last analysis women, the young women
of easy virtue, were the glittering attraction; and truly one might
say they were glittering. Fine feathers make fine birds, and nowhere
more so than in Paris. But there were many birds who would have been
fine in much less showy feathers. In many instances they craved and
secured a demure simplicity which was even more destructive than the
flaring costumes of the demi-monde. It was strange to see American
innocence--the products of Petoskey, Michigan, and Hannibal, Missouri,
cheek by jowl with the most daring and the most vicious women which the
great metropolis could produce. I did not know until some time later
how hard some of these women were, how schooled in vice, how weary
of everything save this atmosphere of festivity and the privilege of
wearing beautiful clothes.

Most people come here for a night or two, or a month or two, or once
in a year or so; and then return to the comparatively dull world from
which they emanated--which is fortunate. If they were here a little
while this deceptive world of delight would lose all its glamour; but
a very few days and you see through the dreary mechanism by which it
is produced; the brow-beating of shabby waiters by greedy managers,
the extortionate charges and tricks by which money is lured from the
pockets of the unwary, the wretched hallrooms and garrets from which
some of these butterflies emanate to wing here in seeming delight and
then disappear. It was a scorching world, and it displayed vice as an
upper and a nether millstone between which youth and beauty is ground
or pressed quickly to a worthless mass. I would defy anybody to live
in this atmosphere so long as five years and not exhibit strongly the
tell-tale marks of decay. When the natural glow of youth has gone comes
the powder and paint box for the face, belladonna for the eyes, rouge
for the lips, palms, and the nails, and perfumes and ornament and the
glister of good clothing; but underneath it all one reads the weariness
of the eye, the sickening distaste for bargaining hour by hour and
day by day, the cold mechanism of what was once natural, instinctive
coquetry. You feel constantly that so many of these demi-mondaines
would sell their souls for one last hour of delight and then gladly
take poison, as so many of them do, to end it all. Consumption,
cocaine and opium maintain their persistent toll. This is a furnace of
desire--this Montmartre district--and it burns furiously with a hard,
white-hot flame until there is nothing left save black cinders and
white ashes. Those who can endure its consuming heat are welcome to its
wonders until emotion and feeling and beauty are no more.




CHAPTER XXV

MONTE CARLO


All my life before going abroad I had been filled with a curiosity as
to the character of the Riviera and Monte Carlo. I had never quite
understood that Nice, Cannes, Mentone, San Remo in Italy and Monte
Carlo were all in the same vicinity--a stone’s throw apart, as it were;
and that this world is as distinct from the spirit of the north of
France as the south of England is from the north of England.

As Barfleur explained it, we went due south from Paris to Marseilles
and then east along the coast of the Mediterranean until we came to the
first stopping-place he had selected, Agay, where we would spend a few
days in peace and quiet, far from the hurry and flare of the café life
we had just left, and then journey on the hour or two more which it
takes to reach Monte Carlo. He made this arrangement in order that we
might have the journey through France by day, and proceed from Agay of
a morning, which would give us, if we had luck--and such luck usually
prevails on the Riviera--a sunlight view of the Mediterranean breaking
in rich blue waves against a coast that is yellow and brown and gold
and green by turns.

Coming south from Paris I had the same sensation of wonder that I had
traveling from Calais to Paris--a wonder as to where the forty odd
millions of the population of France kept itself. It was not visible
from the windows of the flying train. All the way we traveled through
an almost treeless country past little white lawns and vineyards; and
I never realized before, although I must have known, that these same
vineyards were composed of separate vines, set in rows like corn stalks
and standing up for all the world like a gnarled T. Every now and
then a simple, straight-running, silvery stream would appear, making
its way through a perfectly level lane and set on either bank with
tall single lines of feathery poplars. The French landscape painters
have used these over and over; and they illustrate exactly the still,
lonely character of the country. To me, outside of Paris, France has
an atmosphere of silence and loneliness; although, considering the
character of the French people I do not understand how that can be.

On the way south there was much badinage between Barfleur and Sir
Scorp, who accompanied us, as to the character of this adventure. A
certain young friend of Barfleur’s daughter was then resident at Lyons;
and it was Barfleur’s humorously expressed hope, that his daughter’s
friend would bring him a basket of cold chicken, cake, fruit, and wine.
It seems that he had urged Berenice to write her friend that he was
passing through; and I was hourly amused at Scorp’s biting reference
to Barfleur’s “parental ruse,” which he vindictively hoped would come
to nothing. It was as he hoped; for at Lyons the young lady and her
parents appeared, but no basket. There were some minutes of animated
conversation on the platform; and then we were off again at high speed
through the same flat land, until we reached a lovely mountain range in
the south of France--a region of huts and heavy ox-wains. It reminded
me somewhat of the mountain regions of northern Kentucky. At Marseilles
there was a long wait in the dark. A large number of passengers left
the train here; and then we rode on for an hour or two more, arriving
by moonlight at Agay, or at least the nearest railway station to it.

The character of the world in which Agay was located was delicious.
After the raw and cold of our last few days in Paris this satin
atmosphere of moonlight and perfume was wonderful. We stepped out of
a train at the little beach station of this summer coast to find the
trees in full leaf and great palms extending their wide fronds into the
warm air. There was much chatter in French while the cabby struggled
to get all our numerous bags into one vehicle; but when it was all
accomplished and the top lowered so that we could see the night, we set
forth along a long white road between houses which had anything but a
French aspect, being a showy development of things Spanish and Moorish,
and past bright whitewashed walls of stone, over which wide-leaved
palms leaned. It was wonderful to see the moonlight on the water, the
bluish black waves breaking in white ripples on sandy shores, and to
feel the wind of the South. I could not believe that a ten-hour ride
from Paris would make so great a change; but so it was. We clattered up
finally to the Grand Hôtel d’Agay; and although it possessed so fine
a name it was nothing much more than a country inn--comparatively new
and solidly built, with a charming vine-covered balcony overlooking the
sea, and a garden of palms in which one might walk. However, the food,
Barfleur assured us, would be passable. It was only three stories high
and quite primitive in its appointments. We were lighted to our rooms
with candles, but the rooms were large and cool, and the windows, I
discovered by throwing mine open, commanded a magnificent view of the
bay. I stood by my window transfixed by the beauty of the night. Not in
France outside this coast--nor in England--can you see anything like
this in summer. The air was like a caress. Under the white moon you
could see the main outlines of the coast and the white strip of sand
at the bottom. Below us, anchored near the garden, were some boats, and
to the right white houses sheltered in trees and commanding the wonders
of the water. I went to bed breathing a sigh of relief and feeling as
if I should sleep soundly--which I did.

The next morning revealed a world if anything more wonderful. Now all
the whiteness and the brownness and the sharpness of the coast line
were picked out by a brilliant sun. The bay glittered in the light,
a rich indigo blue; and a fisherman putting forth to sea hoisted a
golden sail. I was astonished to find now that the houses instead of
being the drab and white of northern France were as like to be blue
or yellow or green--and always there was a touch of color somewhere,
blue window-sills ornamenting a white house, brown chimneys contrasting
with a blue one, the charm of the Moorish arch and the Moorish lattice
suggesting itself at different points--and always palms. I dressed
and went below and out upon the balcony and through the garden to the
water’s edge, sitting in the warm sun and tossing pebbles into the
water. Flowers were in bloom here--blue and yellow blossoms--and when
Barfleur came down we took a delightful morning walk up a green valley
which led inland between hills. No northern day in June could have
rivaled in perfection the wonder of this day; and we talked of the
stagey make-believe of Parisian night-life as contrasted with this, and
the wonder of spring generally.

“I should think the whole world would want to live here in winter,” I
said.

“The fact is,” replied Barfleur, “what are called the best people do
not come here so much nowadays.”

“Where do they go?” I asked.

“Oh, Switzerland is now the thing in winter--the Alps and all that
relates to them. The new rich have overdone this, and it is becoming a
little banal.”

“They cannot alter the wonder of the climate,” I replied.

We had a table put on the balcony at eleven and ate our morning fish
and rolls and salad there. I can see Sir Scorp cheerfully trifling with
the cat we found there, the morning sun and scenery having put him in a
gay mood, calling, “_Chat, chat, chat!_” and asking, “How do you talk
to a cat in French?” There was an open carriage which came for us at
one into which we threw our fur coats and blankets; and then climbed by
degrees mile after mile up an exquisite slope by the side of a valley
that gradually became a cañon; and at the bottom of which tinkled and
gurgled a mountain stream. This road led to more great trees at the
top of a range overlooking what I thought at first was a great valley
where a fog prevailed, but which a few steps further was revealed as
the wondrous sea--white sails, a distant pavilion protruding like a
fluted marble toy into the blue water, and here and there a pedestrian
far below. We made our way to a delightful inn some half way down and
back, where under soaring black pine trees we had tea at a little green
table--strawberry jam, new bread, and cakes. I shall never forget the
bitter assault I unthinkingly provoked by dipping my spoon into the
jelly jar. All the vials of social wrath were poured upon my troubled
head. “It serves him right,” insisted Barfleur, treacherously. “I saw
him do that once before. These people from the Middle West, what can
you expect?”

That night a grand row developed at dinner between Scorp and Barfleur
as to how long we were to remain in Agay and whether we were to stop
in or out of Monte Carlo. Barfleur’s plan was for remaining at least
three days here, and then going to a hotel not directly in Monte Carlo
but half way between Monte Carlo and Mentone--the Hôtel Bella Riva.
I knew that Barfleur had come here at the present time largely to
entertain me; and since I would rather have had his presence than the
atmosphere of the best hotel in Monte Carlo, it really did not matter
so much to me where we went, so long as it was comfortable. Scorp was
greatly incensed, or pretended to be, to think I should be brought here
to witness the wonders of this festive world, and then be pocketed in
some side spot where half the delicious life would escape me. “Agay!”
he kept commenting, “Agay! We come all the way to the south of France
to stop at Agay! Candles to light us to bed and French peasants for
servants. And then we’ll go to Monte Carlo and stop at some third-rate
hotel! Well, you can go to the Bella Riva if you choose; I am going to
the Palace Hotel where I can see something, and have a decent bed. I
am not going to be packed off any ten miles out of Monte Carlo, and be
compelled to use a street car that stops at twelve o’clock and spend
thirty francs getting home in a carriage!”

This kept up until bedtime with Barfleur offering solemn explanations
of why he had come here, why it would be advisable for us to refresh
ourselves at the fountain of simple scenery after the fogs of London
and the theatric flare of Paris. He had a fine argument for the Bella
Riva as a dwelling-site: it was just half way between Monte Carlo and
Mentone, it commanded all the bay on which Monte Carlo stood. Cap
Martin, with the hotel of that name, here threw its sharp rocky point
far out into the sea. A car-line passed the door. In a half-hour either
way we could be in either Mentone or Monte Carlo.

“Who wants to be in Mentone?” demanded Sir Scorp. “I would rather be
an hour away from it instead of half an hour. If I came to see Monte
Carlo I would not be bothering about Mentone. I, for one, will not go.”

It was not long before I learned that Scorp did much protesting but
equally much following. The patient silence of Barfleur coupled with
direct action at the decisive moment usually won. Scorp’s arguments
did result in one thing. The next morning, instead of idling in the
sun and taking a carriage ride over the adjacent range, we gathered
all our belongings and deposited them at the near-by station, while
Barfleur and I climbed to the top of an adjacent hill where was an old
water-pool, to have a last look at the lovely, high-colored, florescent
bay of Agay. Then the long train, with drawing-room cars from all parts
of Europe rolled in; and we were off again.

Barfleur called my attention as we went along to the first of the
umbrella trees--of which I was to see so many later in Italy--coming
into view in the occasional sheltered valleys which we were passing,
and later those marvels of southern France and all Italy, the hill
cities, towering like great cathedrals high in the air. I shall never
forget the impression the first sight of one of these made on me.
In America we have nothing save the illusion of clouds over distant
landscapes to compare with it. I was astonished, transported--the
reality was so much more wonderful than the drawings of which I had
seen so many. Outside the car windows the sweeping fronds of the palms
seemed almost to brush the train, hanging over white enclosures of
stone. Green shutters and green lattices; red roofs and bright blue
jardinières; the half-Italianized Frenchman with his swarthy face and
burning eyes. Presently the train stopped at Cannes. I struck out to
walk in the pretty garden which I saw was connected with the depot,
Barfleur to send a telegram, Scorp to show how fussy and cantankerous
he could be. Here were long trains that had come from St. Petersburg
via Vilna and Vienna; and others from Munich, Berlin and Copenhagen
with diners labeled “_Speisewagen_” and sleepers “_Schlafwagen_.” Those
from Paris, Calais, Brussels, Cherbourg bore the imposing legend,
“_Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits et des Grands Express
Européens_.” There was a long black train rumbling in from the south
with cars marked Tripoli, Roma, Firenze and Milano. You had a sense,
from merely looking at the stations, that the idleness and the luxury
of all the world was pouring in here at will.

In ten minutes we were off again--Barfleur expatiating solemnly on the
fact that in England a homely girl was left to her own devices with no
one to make anything of her, she being plain and that being the end of
it; while here in France something was done with the poorest specimens.

“Now those two young ladies,” he said, waving his hand dramatically in
the direction of two departing travelers,--“they are not much--but look
at them. See how smartly they are gotten up. Somebody will marry them.
They have been encouraged to buck up,--to believe that there is always
hope.” And he adjusted his monocle cheerfully.

Our train was pulling into the station at Monte Carlo. I had the usual
vague idea of a much-talked-of but never-seen place.

“I can hear the boys calling ‘Ascenseur,’” exclaimed Barfleur to Scorp
prophetically, when we were still a little way out. He was as keen for
the adventure as a child--much more so than I was. I could see how
he set store by the pleasure-providing details of the life here; and
Scorp, for all his lofty superiority, was equally keen. They indicated
to me the great masses of baggage which occupied the platforms--all
bright and new and mostly of good leather. I was interested to see
the crowds of people--for there was a train departing in another
direction--and to hear the cries of “Ascenseur” as predicted--the
elevators lifting to the terrace in front of the Casino, where the
tracks enter along a shelf of a declivity considerably above the
level of the sea. It is a tight little place--all that I had expected
in point of showiness--gay rococo houses, white and cream, with red
roofs climbing up the sides of the bare brown hill which rises to La
Turbie above. We did not stop, but went on to Mentone where we were
to lunch. It was charming to see striped awnings--pink and white and
blue and green--gay sunshades of various colors and ladies in fresh
linens and silks and men in white flannels and an atmosphere of outing
generally. I think a sort of summer madness seizes on people under
such circumstances and dull care is thrown to the winds, and you plan
gay adventures and dream dreams and take yourself to be a singularly
important person. And to think that this atmosphere should always be
here, and that it can always be reached out of the snows of Russia and
the bitter storms of New York and the dreary gray fogs of London, and
the biting winds of Berlin and Paris!

We lunched at the Admiralty--one of those _restaurants celebrés_ where
the _haute cuisine_ of France was to be found in its perfection, where
balconies of flowers commanded the _côte d’azure_.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE LURE OF GOLD!


Before I go a step further in this narrative I must really animadvert
to the subject of restaurants and the _haute cuisine_ of France
generally, for in this matter Barfleur was as keen as the greatest
connoisseurs are in the matter of pictures. He loved and remembered
the quality of dishes and the method of their preparation and the
character of the men who prepared them and the atmosphere in which they
were prepared and in fact everything which relates to the culinary and
gastronomic arts and the history of the gourmet generally.

In Paris and London Barfleur was constantly talking of the restaurants
of importance and contrasting the borrowed French atmosphere of the
best English restaurants with the glories of the parent kitchens in
France. He literally schooled me in the distinction which was to be
drawn between the Café Anglais, Voisin’s and Paillard’s, and those
smart after-supper restaurants of the Montmartre district where the
cuisine of France had been degraded by the addition of negroes, tinsel,
dancers, and music. Nevertheless he was willing to admit that their
cuisine was not bad. As I remember it now, I was advised to breakfast
at Henry’s, to dine at the Ritz, and to sup at Durand’s; but if I chose
to substitute the Café de Paris for the Ritz at dinner I was not going
far wrong. He knew that M. Braquesec, the younger, was now in charge
of Voisin’s and that Paul was the _maître d’hôtel_ and that during the
Commune Voisin’s had once served _consommé d’éléphant_, _le chameau
roti à l’Anglais_, and _le chat planqué de rats_. He thought it must
have been quite excellent because M. Braquesec, the elder, supervised
it all and because the wines served with it were from twenty to forty
years of age.

When it came to the Riviera he was well aware of all that region had to
promise from Cannes to Mentone; and he could nicely differentiate the
advantages of the Café de Paris; the grand dining-room of the Hôtel de
Paris which was across the street; the Hermitage, which he insisted had
quite the most beautiful dining-room in Monte Carlo; the Princess which
one of the great stars of the opera had very regularly patronized some
years before; the restaurant of the Grand Hotel which he considered
very exceptional indeed; and the restaurant at the terminus of the
La Turbie mountain railway--which he emphatically approved and which
commanded a magnificent view of the coast and the sea. I was drilled
to understand that if I had _mostelle à l’Anglais_ at the Hôtel de
Paris I was having a very excellent fish of the country, served in
the very best manner, which is truly worth knowing. If we went to the
Princess, the _maître d’hôtel_, whom he knew from an older day, would
serve us midgeon in some marvelous manner which would be something for
me to remember. At the Café de Paris we were to have soupe Monègasque
which had a reminiscence, so he insisted, of Bouillabaisse and was very
excellent. The soupions were octopi, but delicate little ones--not the
kind that would be thrust upon one in Rome. I was lost among discourses
regarding the value of the Regents at Nice; the art of M. Fleury, now
the manager of the Hôtel de Paris; and what a certain head-master
could do for one in the way of providing a little local color, as
Barfleur termed it, in the food. To all of this, not being a gourmet,
I paid as strict attention as I could; though I fear me much, that a
large proportion of the exquisite significance of it all was lost on
me. I can only say, however, that in spite of Scorp’s jeering, which
was constant, the only time we had a really wonderful repast was when
Barfleur ordered it.

The first luncheon at the Admiralty was an excellent case in point.
Barfleur being on the Riviera and being host to several, was in the
most stupendous of artistic moods. He made up a menu of the most
delicious of hors d’œuvre--which he insisted should never have been
allowed to take the place of soup, but which, alas, the custom of the
time sanctioned and the caviare of which in this case was gray, a
point which he wished me particularly to note--sole walewski; roast
lamb; salad nicois; and Genoese asparagus in order to give our meal
the flavor of the land. We had coffee on the balcony afterwards, and
I heard much concerning the wonders of this region and of the time
when the Winter Palace was the place to lunch. A grand duke was a part
of the day’s ensemble, and two famous English authors before whom we
paraded with dignity.

After lunch we made our way to the Hôtel Bella Riva, which Barfleur
in spite of Scorp’s complaints had finally selected. It stood on a
splendid rise between Mentone and Monte Carlo; and here, after some
slight bargaining we were assigned to three rooms _en suite_ with bath.
I was given the corner room with two balconies and a flood of sunshine
and such a view as I have never seen from any window before or since.
Straight before me lay the length of Cap Martin, a grove of thousands
of olive trees reflecting from its burnished leaves the rays of the sun
and crowding it completely, and beyond it the delicious sweep of the
Mediterranean. To the right lay the bay of Monte Carlo, the heights of
La Turbie, and all the glittering world which is Monte Carlo proper.
To the left lay Mentone and the green and snow-capped mountains of
Ventimiglia and San Remo faintly visible in the distance. Never an hour
but the waters of the sea were a lighter or a darker shade of blue and
never an hour but a lonely sail was crossing in the foreground. High
above the inn at La Turbie, faintly visible in the distance, rose a
ruined column of Augustus--a broken memory of the time when imperial
Rome was dominant here, and when the Roman legions passed this way
to Spain. At different hours I could hear the bugle of some frontier
garrison sounding reveille, guard-mount, and the sun-set call. Oh,
those wonderful mornings when I was waked by the clear note of a horn
flying up the valleys of the mountains and sounding over the sea!

Immediately after our arrival it was settled that once we had made a
swift toilet we would start for Monte Carlo. We were ready to bring
back tremendous winnings--and eager to see this showy world, the like
of which, Scorp insisted, was not to be found elsewhere.

“Oh, yes,” he said, “I have been to Biarritz and to Ostend and
Aix-les-Bains--but they are not like this. We really should live at
the Palace where we could walk on the terrace in the morning and watch
the pigeon-shooting.” He told a significant story of how once having a
toothache he came out of the card-rooms of the Casino into the grand
lobby and attempted to pour a little laudanum out of a thin vial, with
which to ease the pain. “I stepped behind a column,” he explained, “so
that I might not be seen; but just as I uncorked the vial four guards
seized me and hurried me out of the place. They thought I was taking
poison. I had to make plain my identity to the management before they
would let me back.”

We arrived at the edge of the corporation which is Monte Carlo and
walked in, surveying the character of the place. It was as gaudy and
rococoesque as one might well expect this world to be. It reminded
me in part of that Parisian world which one finds about the Arc de
Triomphe, rich and comfortable, only there are no carriages in Monte
Carlo to speak of. The distances are too slight and the grades too
steep. When we reached the square of the Casino, it did not strike me
as having any especial charm. It was small and sloping, and laid off
in square beds of reddish flowers with greensward about and gravel
paths going down either side. At the foot lay the Casino, ornate and
cream-white, with a glass and iron canopy over the door and a swarm of
people moving to and fro--not an idling throng but rather having an air
of considerable industry about it, quite as one might expect to find in
a business world. People were bustling along as we were to get to the
Casino or to go away from it on some errand and get back. We hurried
down the short length of the sward, checking our coats, after waiting
a lengthy time for our turn in line, and then entering the chambers
where credentials are examined and cards of admission sold. There was
quite some formality about this, letters being examined, our personal
signature and home address taken and then we were ready to enter.

While Barfleur presented our credentials, Sir Scorp and I strolled
about in the lobby observing the inpouring and outpouring throng. He
showed me the exact pillar where he had attempted to ease his tooth.
This was an interesting world of forceful people. The German, the
Italian, the American, the Englishman and the Russian were easily
recognizable. Sir Scorp was convinced that the faces of the winners and
the losers could be distinguished, but I am afraid I was not enough of
a physiognomist to do this. If there were any who had just lost their
last dollar I did not detect them. On the contrary it seemed to me that
the majority were abnormally cheerful and were having the best time
in the world. A large bar at the end of the room opposite the general
entrance to the card-rooms had a peculiarly American appearance.
The one thing that was evident was that all here were healthy and
vigorous, with a love of life in their veins, eager to be entertained,
and having the means in a large majority of cases to accomplish this
end. It struck me here as it has in so many other places where great
pleasure-loving throngs congregate, that the difference between the
person who has something and the person who has nothing is one of
intense desire, and what, for a better phrase, I will call a capacity
to live.

The inner chambers of the Casino were divided into two groups, the
outer being somewhat less ornately decorated and housing those who for
reasons of economy prefer to be less exclusive, and the inner more
elaborate in decoration and having of an evening, it was said, a more
gorgeously dressed throng. Just why one should choose less expensive
rooms when gambling, unless low in funds, I could not guess. Those in
both sets of rooms seemed to have enough money to gamble. I could not
see, after some experience, that there was very much difference. The
players seemed to wander rather indiscriminately through both sets of
rooms. Certainly we did. An extra charge of five louis was made for the
season’s privilege of entering the inner group or “_Cirque privé_” as
it was called.

I shall never forget my first sight of the famous gaming-tables in
the outer rooms--for we were not venturing into the inner at present.
Aside from the glamour of the crowd--which was as impressive as an
opera first night--and the decorative quality of the room which was
unduly rich and brilliant, I was most vividly impressed by the vast
quantities of money scattered so freely over the tables, small piles of
gold louis, stacks of eight, ten, fifteen and even twenty-five franc
pieces, layers of pale crisp bank-notes whose value was anywhere from
one hundred to one thousand francs. It was like looking through the
cashier’s window of an immense bank. The mechanism and manipulation of
the roulette wheel I did not understand at first nor the exact duties
of the many croupiers seated at each table. Their cry of “Rien ne _va
plus_!” and the subsequent scraping together of the shining coin with
the little rakes or the throwing back of silver, gold and notes to the
lucky winner gripped my attention like a vise. “Great God!” I thought,
“supposing I was to win a thousand pounds with my fifteen. I should
stay in Europe an entire year.”

Like all beginners I watched the process with large eyes and then
seeing Barfleur get back five gold louis for one placed on a certain
number I ventured one of my own. Result: three louis. I tried again
on another number and won two more. I saw myself (in fancy) the happy
possessor of a thousand pounds. My next adventure cost me two louis,
whereupon I began to wonder whether I was such a fortunate player after
all.

“Come with me,” Barfleur said, coming around to where I stood
adventuring my small sums with indescribable excitement and taking my
arm genially. “I want to send some money to my mother for luck. I’ve
just won fifteen pounds.”

“Talk about superstition,” I replied, coming away from the table, “I
didn’t believe it of you.”

“I’m discovered!” he smiled philosophically; “besides I want to send
some sweets to the children.”

We strolled out into the bright afternoon sun finding the terrace
comparatively empty, for the Casino draws most of the crowd during
the middle and late afternoon. It was strange to leave these shaded,
artificially lighted rooms with their swarms of well-dressed men
and women sitting about or bending over tables all riveted on the
one thrilling thing--the drop of the little white ball in a certain
pocket--and come out into the glittering white world with its blazing
sun, its visible blue sea, its cream-colored buildings and its waving
palms. We went to several shops--one for sweets and one for flowers,
_haut parisiennes_ in their atmosphere--and duly dispatched our
purchases. Then we went to the post-office, plastered with instructions
in various languages, and saw that the money was sent to Barfleur’s
mother. Then we returned to the Casino and Barfleur went his way,
while I wandered from board to board studying the crowd, risking an
occasional louis, and finally managing to lose three pounds more than
I had won. In despair I went to see what Scorp was doing. He had three
or four stacks of gold coin in front of him at a certain table, all
of five hundred dollars. He was risking these in small stacks of ten
and fifteen louis and made no sign when he won or lost. On several
occasions I thought he was certain to win a great sum, so lavishly were
gold louis thrown him by the croupier, but on others I felt equally
sure he was to be disposed of, so freely were his gold pieces scraped
away from him.

“How are you making out?” I asked.

“I think I’ve lost eight hundred francs. If I should win this though,
I’ll risk a bee-a.”

“What’s a bee-a?”

“A thousand franc note.”

My poor little three louis seemed suddenly insignificant. A lady
sitting next to him, a woman of perhaps fifty, with a cool, calculating
face had perhaps as much as two thousand dollars in gold and notes
piled up before her. All around the table were these piles of gold,
silver and notes. It was a fascinating scene.

“There, that ends me,” observed Scorp, all at once, his stock of gold
on certain numbers disappearing with the rake of the croupier. “Now I’m
done. We might walk out in the lobby and watch the crowd.” All his good
gold so quietly raked in by the croupier was lingering painfully in my
memory. I was beginning to see plainly that I would not make a good
gambler. Such a loss distressed me.

“How much did you lose?” I inquired.

“Oh, a thousand francs,” he replied.

We strolled up and down, Scorp commenting sarcastically on one type and
another and yet with a genial tolerance which was amusing.

I remember a charming-looking cocotte, a radiant type of brunette, with
finely chiseled features, slim, delicate fingers, a dainty little foot,
who, clad in a fetching costume of black and white silk which fitted
her with all the airy grace of a bon-bon ribbon about its box, stood
looking uncertainly about as if she expected to meet some one.

“Look at her,” Scorp commented with that biting little ha! ha! of his,
which involved the greatest depths of critical sarcasm imaginable.
“There she is. She’s lost her last louis and she’s looking for some one
to pay for her dinner!”

I had to smile to myself at the man’s croaking indifference to the
lady’s beauty. Her obvious charms had not the slightest interest for
him.

Of another lovely creature who went by with her head held high and her
lips parted in a fetching, coaxing way he observed, “She practises that
in front of her mirror!” and finding nothing else to attack, finally
turned to me. “I say, it’s a wonder you don’t take a cocktail. There’s
your American bar.”

“It’s the wrong time, Scorp,” I replied. “You don’t understand the art
of cocktail drinking.”

“I should hope not!” he returned morosely.

Finally after much more criticism of the same sort Barfleur arrived,
having lost ten louis, and we adjourned for tea. As usual an
interesting argument arose now not only as to where we were to dine,
but how we were to live our very lives in Monte Carlo.

“Now I should think,” said Barfleur, “it would be nice if we were to
dine at the Princess. You can get sole and _canard à la presse_ there
and their wines are excellent. Besides we can’t drive to the Bella Riva
every evening.”

“Just as I thought!” commented Scorp bitterly. “Just as I thought. Now
that we are staying at Bella Riva, a half hour or so away, we will dine
in Monte Carlo. I knew it. We will do no such thing. We will go back to
the Bella Riva, change our clothes, dine simply and inexpensively [this
from the man who had just lost a thousand francs] come back here, buy
our tickets for the _Cirque privé_ and gamble inside. First we go to
Agay and spend a doleful time among a lot of peasants and now we hang
around the outer rooms of the Casino. We can’t live at the Hôtel de
Paris or enter the _Cirque privé_ but we can dine at the Princess. Ha!
ha! Well, we will do no such thing. Besides, a little fasting will not
do you any harm. You need not waste all your money on your stomach.”

The man had a gay acidity which delighted me.

Barfleur merely contemplated the ceiling of the lobby where we were
gathered while Sir Scorp rattled on in this fashion.

“I expected to get tickets for the _Cirque privé_--” he soothed and
added suggestively, “It will cost at least twenty francs to drive over
to the Bella Riva.”

“Exactly!” replied Scorp. “As I predicted. We can’t live in Monte Carlo
but we can pay twenty francs to get over to Cap Martin. Thank Heaven
there are still street cars. I do not need to spend all my money on
shabby carriages, riding out in the cold!” (It was a heavenly night.)

“I think we’d better dine at the Princess and go home early,” pleaded
Barfleur. “We’re all tired. To-morrow I suggest that we go up to La
Turbie for lunch. That will prove a nice diversion and after that we’ll
come down and get our tickets for the _Cirque privé_. Come now. Do be
reasonable. Dreiser ought to see something of the restaurant life of
Monte Carlo.”

As usual Barfleur won. We _did_ go to the Café Princess. We _did_ have
_sole Normande_. We _did_ have _canard à la presse_. We _did_ have some
excellent wine and Barfleur was in his glory.




CHAPTER XXVII

WE GO TO EZE


The charms of Monte Carlo are many. Our first morning there, to the
sound of a horn blowing reveille in the distance, I was up betimes
enjoying the wonderful spectacles from my balcony. The sun was just
peeping up over the surface of an indigo sea, shooting sharp golden
glances in every direction. Up on the mountains, which rise sharp and
clear like great unornamented cathedrals back of the jeweled villages
of this coast, it was picking out shepherd’s hut and fallen mementoes
of the glory that was Rome. A sailboat or two was already making its
way out to sea, and below me on that long point of land which is Cap
Martin, stretching like a thin green spear into the sea, was the
splendid olive orchard which I noted the day before, its gleaming
leaves showing a different shade of green from what it had then. I did
not know it until the subject came up that olive trees live to be a
thousand years old and that they do as well here on this little strip
of coast, protected by the high mountains at their back, as they do
anywhere in Italy. In fact, as I think of it, this lovely projection
of land, no wider than to permit of a few small villages and cities
crowding between the sea and the mountains, is a true projection of
Italy itself, its palms, olive trees, cypresses, umbrella trees and its
peasants and architecture. I understand that a bastard French--half
French, half Italian--is spoken here and that only here are the hill
cities truly the same as they are in Italy.

While I was gazing at the morning sun and the blue sea and marveling
how quickly the comfortable Riviera Express had whirled us out of the
cold winds of Paris into this sun-kissed land, Barfleur must have been
up and shaving, for presently he appeared, pink and clean in his brown
dressing-gown, to sit out on my lovely balcony with me.

“You know,” he said, after he had commented on the wonder of the
morning and the delicious soothing quality of the cool air, “Scorp is
certainly an old fuss-button. There he lies in there now, ready to
pounce on us. Of course he isn’t very strong physically and that makes
him irritable. He does so love to be contrary.”

“I think he is a good running-mate for you,” I observed. “If he leans
to asceticism in the matter of food, you certainly run to the other
extreme. Sybaritic is a mild expression for your character.”

“You don’t mean it?”

“I certainly do.”

“In what way have I shown myself sybaritic?”

I charged him with various crimes. My amicable lecture was interrupted
by the arrival of rolls and coffee and we decided to take breakfast in
the company of Scorp. We knocked at his door.

“_Entrez!_”

There he was, propped up in bed, his ascetic face crowned by his
brownish black hair and set with those burning dark eyes--a figure of
almost classic significance.

“Ah!” he exclaimed grimly, “here he comes. The gourmet’s guide to
Europe!”

“Now, do be cheerful this morning, Scorp, do be,” cooed Barfleur.
“Remember it is a lovely morning. You are on the Riviera. We are going
to have a charming time.”

“You are, anyway!” commented Scorp.

“I am the most sacrificial of men, I assure you,” commented Barfleur.
“I would do anything to make you happy. We will go up to La Turbie
to-day, if you say, and order a charming lunch. After that we will go
to Eze, if you say, and on to Nice for dinner, if you think fit. We
will go into the Casino there for a little while and then return. Isn’t
that a simple and satisfactory program? Dreiser and I will walk up to
La Turbie. You can join us at one for lunch. You think he ought to see
Eze, don’t you?”

“Yes, if there isn’t some Café de Paris hidden away up there somewhere
where you can gormandize again. If we can just manage to get you past
the restaurants!”

So it was agreed: Barfleur and I would walk; Sir Scorp was to follow
by train. As the day was balmy and perfect, all those special articles
of adornment purchased in London for this trip were extracted from our
luggage and duly put on--light weight suits, straw hats and ties of
delicate tints; and then we set forth. The road lay in easy swinging
S’s, up and up past terraced vineyards and garden patches and old
stone cottages and ambling muleteers with their patient little donkeys
heavily burdened. Automobiles, I noticed, even at this height came
grumbling up or tearing down--and always the cypress tree with its
whispering black-green needles and the graceful umbrella tree made
artistic architectural frames for the vistas of the sea.

Here and now I should like to pay my tribute to the cypress tree. I saw
it later in all its perfection at Pisa, Rome, Florence, Spello, Assisi
and elsewhere in Italy, but here at Monte Carlo, or rather outside of
it, I saw it first. I never saw it connected with anything tawdry or
commonplace and wherever it grows there is dignity and beauty. It is
not to be seen anywhere in immediate contact with this feverish Casino
world of Monte Carlo. It is as proud as beauty itself, as haughty as
achievement. By old ruins, in sacred burial grounds, by worn gates and
forgotten palaces it sways and sighs. It is as mournful as death--as
somber in its mien as great age and experience--a tree of the elders.
Where Rome grew it grew, and to Greek and Roman temples in their prime
and pride it added its sacred company.

Plant a cypress tree near my grave when I am dead. To think of its tall
spearlike body towering like a stately monument over me would be all
that I could artistically ask. If some of this illusory substance which
seems to be that which is I, physically, here on this earth, should
mingle with its fretted roots and be builded into the noble shaft of
its body I should be glad. It would be a graceful and artistic way to
disappear into the unknown.

Our climb to La Turbie was in every respect delightful. We stopped
often to comment on the cathedral-like character of the peaks, to
speculate as to the age of the stone huts.

About half way up we came to a little inn called the Corniche, which
really hangs on the cornice of this great range, commanding the wide,
blue sweep of the Mediterranean below; and here, under the shade of
umbrella trees and cypresses and with the mimosa in full bloom and with
some blossom which Barfleur called “cherry-pie” blowing everywhere,
we took seats at a little green table to have a pot of tea. It is an
American inn--this Corniche--with an American flag fluttering high on
a white pole, and an American atmosphere not unlike that of a country
farmhouse in Indiana. There were some chickens scratching about the
door; and at least three canaries in separate bright brass cages hung
in the branches of the surrounding trees. They sang with tremendous
energy. With the passing of a muleteer, whose spotted cotton shirt and
earth-colored trousers and dusty skin bespoke the lean, narrow life of
the peasant, we discussed wealth and poverty, lavish expenditure and
meager subsistence, the locust-like quality of the women of fashion
and of pleasure, who eat and eat and gorge and glut themselves of the
showy things of life without aim or even thought; the peasant on this
mountainside, with perhaps no more than ten cents a day to set his
beggar board, while below the idle company in the Casino, shining like
a white temple from where we sat, were wasting thousands upon thousands
of dollars hourly. Barfleur agreed most solemnly with it all. He was
quite sympathetic. The tables there, he said, even while we looked,
were glutted with gold, and the Prince of Monaco was building, with his
surplus earnings, useless marine museums which no one visited.

I was constantly forgetting in our peregrinations about the
neighborhood how small the Principality of Monaco is. I am sure it
would fit nicely into ten city blocks. A large portion of Monte Carlo
encroaches on French territory--only the Casino, the terrace, the
heights of Monaco belong to the Principality. One-half of a well-known
restaurant there, I believe, is in Monaco and the other half in France.
La Turbie, on the heights here, the long road we had come, almost
everything in fact, was in France. We went into the French post-office
to mail cards and then on to the French restaurant commanding the
heights. This particular restaurant commands a magnificent view. A
circle about which the automobiles turned in front of its door was
supported by a stone wall resting on the sharp slope of the mountain
below. All the windows of its principal dining-room looked out over
the sea, and of the wonderful view I was never weary. The room had an
oriental touch, and the white tables and black-coated waiters accorded
ill with this. Still it offered that smartness of service which only
the French restaurants possess.

Barfleur was for waiting for Scorp who had not arrived. I was for
eating, as I was hungry. Finally we sat down to luncheon and we were
consuming the sweet when in he came. His brownish-black eyes burned
with their usual critical fire. If Sir Scorp had been born with a
religious, reforming spirit instead of a penchant for art he would
have been a St. Francis of Assisi. As it was, without anything to base
it on, except Barfleur’s gormandizing propensities, he had already
established moral censorship over our actions.

“Ah, here you are, eating as usual,” he observed with that touch of
lofty sarcasm which at once amused and irritated me. “No excursion
without a meal as its object.”

“Sit down, El Greco,” I commented, “and note the beautiful view. This
should delight your esthetic soul.”

“It might delight mine, but I am not so sure about yours. Barfleur
would certainly see nothing in it if there were not a restaurant
here--ha!”

“I found a waiter here who used to serve me in the Café Royal in
London,” observed Barfleur cheerfully.

“Now we can die content,” sighed Scorp. “We have been recognized by a
French waiter on the Riviera. Ha! Never happy,” he added, turning to
me, “unless he is being recognized by waiters somewhere--his one claim
to glory.”

We went out to see the ruined monument to Augustus Cæsar, crumbling
on this high mountain and commanding the great blue sweep of the
Mediterranean below. There were a number of things in connection with
this monument which were exceedingly interesting. It illustrated so
well the Roman method of construction: a vast core of rubble and
brick, faced with marble. Barfleur informed me that only recently the
French government had issued an order preventing the removal of any
more of the marble, much of which had already been stolen, carted
away or cut up here into other forms. Immense marble drums of pure
white stone were still lying about, fallen from their places; and in
the surrounding huts of the peasant residents of La Turbie could be
seen parts of once noble pillars set into the fabric of their shabby
doorways or used as corner-stones to support their pathetic little
shelters. I recall seeing several of these immense drums of stone set
at queer angles under the paper walls of the huts, the native peasants
having built on them as a base, quite as a spider might attach its
gossamer net to a substantial bush or stone. I reflected at length on
the fate of greatness and how little the treasures of one age may be
entrusted to another. Time and chance, dullness and wasteful ignorance,
lie in wait for them all.

The village of La Turbie, although in France, gave me my first
real taste of the Italian village. High up on this mountain above
Monte Carlo, in touch really with the quintessence of showy
expenditure--clothes, jewels, architecture, food--here it stood, quite
as it must have been standing for the last three or four hundred
years--its narrow streets clambering up and down between houses of
gray stone or brick, covered with gray lichens. I thought of Benvenuto
Cellini--how he always turned the corners of the dark, narrow streets
of Rome in as wide a circle as possible in order to save himself from
any lurking assassin--that he might draw his own knife quickly. Dirt
and age and quaintness and romance: it was in these terms that La
Turbie spoke to us. Although anxious to proceed to Eze, not so very
far away, which they both assured me was so much more picturesque
and characteristic, yet we lingered, looking lovingly up and down
narrow passages where stairs clambered gracefully, where arches
curved picturesquely over streets, and where plants bloomed bravely
in spotted, crumbling windows. Age! age! And with it men, women and
children of the usual poverty-stricken Italian type--not French, but
Italians. Women with bunchy blue or purple skirts, white or colored
kerchiefs, black hair, wrinkled, yellow or blackish-brown faces,
glittering dark eyes and claw-like hands.

Not far from the center of this moldy scene, flourishing like a great
lichen at the foot of Augustus, his magnificent column, was a public
fountain, of what date I do not know. The housewives of the community
were hard at their washing, piling the wet clothes in soapy masses on
the stone rim of the basin. They were pattering and chattering, their
skirts looped up at their hips, their heads wound about with cloths of
various colors. It brought back to my mind, by way of contrast, the
gloomy wash- and bath-house in Bethnal Green, which I have previously
commented on. Despite poverty and ignorance, the scene here was so
much more inviting--even inspiring. Under a blue sky, in the rays of
a bright afternoon sun, beside a moldering but none the less lovely
fountain, they seemed a very different kind of mortal--far more
fortunate than those I had seen in Bethnal Green and Stepney. What
can governments do toward supplying blue skies, broken fountains and
humanly stirring and delightful atmosphere? Would Socialism provide
these things?

With many backward glances, we departed, conveyed hence in an
inadequate little vehicle drawn by one of the boniest horses it has
ever been my lot to ride behind. The cheerful driver was as fat as
his horse was lean, and as dusty as the road itself. We were wedged
tightly in the single green cloth seat, Scorp on one side, I on the
other, Barfleur in the middle, expatiating as usual on the charm of
life and enduring cheerfully all the cares and difficulties of his
exalted and self-constituted office of guide, mentor and friend.

Deep green valleys, dizzy precipices along which the narrow road
skirted nervously, tall tops of hills that rose about you craggily or
pastorally--so runs the road to Eze and we followed it jestingly, Sir
Scorp so dizzy contemplating the depths that we had to hold him in.
Barfleur was gay and ebullient. I never knew a man who could become so
easily intoxicated with life.

“There you have it,” said Sir Scorp, pointing far down a green slope to
where a shepherd was watching his sheep, a cape coat over his arm, a
crooked staff in his hand; “there is your pastoral, lineally descended
from the ancient Greeks. Barfleur pretends to love nature, but that
would not bring him out here. There is no _canard à la presse_ attached
to it--no _sole walewski_.”

“And see the goose-girl!” I exclaimed, as a maiden in bare feet, her
skirt falling half way below her knees, crossed the road.

“All provided, my dear boy,” assured Barfleur, beaming on me through
his monocle. “Everything as it should be for you. You see how I do.
Goose-girls, shepherds, public fountains, old monuments to Cæsar,
anything you like. I will show you Eze now. Nothing finer in Europe.”

We were nearing Eze around the green edge of a mountain--its top--and
there I saw it, my first hill-city. Not unlike La Turbie, it was old
and gray, but with that spectacular dignity which anything set on a
hill possesses. Barfleur carefully explained to me that in the olden
days--some few hundred years before--the inhabitants of the seashore
and plain were compelled to take to the hills to protect themselves
against marauding pirates--that the hill-city dates from the earliest
times in Italy and was common to the Latins before the dawn of history.
Eze towered up, completely surrounded by a wall, the only road leading
to it being the one on which we were traveling. By a bridge we crossed
a narrow gully, dividing one mountain height from another, and then,
discharging our fat cabman and his bony horse, mounted to the open gate
or arched door, now quite unguarded. Some of the village children were
selling the common flowers of the field, and a native in tight dusty
trousers and soft hat was entering.

I think I devoured the strangeness and glamour of Eze as one very
hungry would eat a meal. I examined all the peculiarities of this outer
entrance and noted how like a hole in a snail shell it was, giving not
directly into the old city, or village, but into a path that skirted
the outer wall. Above were holes through which defenders could shower
arrows and boiling oil upon those who might have penetrated this outer
defense. There was a blind passage at one point, luring the invaders
into a devilish pocket where their fate was sealed. If one gained
this first gate and the second, which gave into a narrow, winding,
upward-climbing street, the fighting would be hand to hand and always
upward against men on a higher level. The citadel, as we found at last,
was now a red and gray brick ruin, only some arches and angles of
which were left, crowning the summit, from which the streets descended
like the whorls of a snail-shell. Gray cobble-stone, and long narrow
bricks set on their sides, form the streets or passages. The squat
houses of brick and gray stone followed closely the convolutions of the
street. It was a silent, sleepy little city. Few people were about.
The small shops were guarded by old women or children. The men were
sheep-herders, muleteers, gardeners and farmers on the slopes below.
Anything that is sold in this high-placed city is brought up to it on
the backs of slow-climbing, recalcitrant donkeys. One blessed thing,
the sewage problem of these older Italian-French cities, because of
their situation on the hillside, solves itself--otherwise, God help
the cities. Barfleur insisted that there was leprosy hereabouts--a
depressing thought.

Climbing up and around these various streets, peering in at the meager
little windows where tobacco, fruit, cheese and modest staples were
sold, we reached finally the summit of Eze, where for the first time
in Italy--I count the Riviera Italian--the guide nuisance began. An
old woman, in patois French, insisted on chanting about the ruins. Sir
Scorp kept repeating, “No, no, my good woman, go away,” and I said
in English, “Run, tell it to Barfleur. He is the bell-wether of this
flock.”

Barfleur clambered to safety up a cracked wall of the ruin and from his
dizzy height eyed her calmly and bade her “Run along, now.” But it was
like King Canute bidding the sea to retreat, till she had successfully
taken toll of us. Meanwhile we stared in delight at the Mediterranean,
at the olive groves, the distant shepherds, at the lovely blue vistas
and the pale threads of roads.

We were so anxious to get to Nice in time for dinner, and so opposed
to making our way by the long dusty road which lay down the mountain,
that we decided to make a short cut of it and go down the rocky side of
the hill by a foot-wide path which was pointed out to us by the village
priest, a haggard specimen of a man who, in thin cassock and beggarly
shoes and hat, paraded before his crumbling little church door. We
were a noble company, if somewhat out of the picture, as we piled down
this narrow mountaineer’s track--Barfleur in a brilliant checked suit
and white hat, and Sir Scorp in very smart black. My best yellow
shoes (ninety francs in Paris) lent a pleasing note to my otherwise
inconspicuous attire, and gave me some concern, for the going was most
rough and uncertain.

We passed shepherds tending sheep on sharp slopes, a donkey-driver
making his way upward with three donkeys all heavily laden, an
umbrella-tree sheltering a peasant so ancient that he must have
endured from Grecian days, and olive groves whose shadows were as
rich as that bronze which time has favored with its patina. It seemed
impossible that half way between Monte Carlo and Nice--those twin
worlds of spendthrift fashion and pampered vice--should endure a scene
so idyllic. The Vale of Arcady is here; all that art could suggest or
fancy desire, a world of simple things. Such scenes as this, remarked
Sir Scorp, were favored by his great artistic admiration--Daubigny.

We found a railway station somewhere, and then we got to Nice for
dinner. Once more a soul-stirring argument between Barfleur and Sir
Scorp. We would take tea at Rumpelmeyer’s--we would _not_ take tea at
Rumpelmeyer’s. We would dine at The Regence; we would _not_ dine at The
Regence. We would pay I-forget-how-many louis and enter the baccarat
chambers of the Casino; we would _not_ do anything of the sort. It was
desired by Barfleur that I should see the wonders of the sea-walk with
the waves spraying the protecting wall. It was desired by Scorp that
I should look in all the jewelry shop windows with him and hear him
instruct in the jeweler’s art. How these matters were finally adjusted
is lost in the haze of succeeding impressions. We _did_ have tea at
Rumpelmeyer’s, however--a very commonplace but bright affair--and
then we loitered in front of shop windows where Sir Scorp pointed out
really astounding jewels offered to the public for fabulous sums. One
great diamond he knew to have been in the possession of the Sultan
of Turkey, and you may well trust his word and his understanding. A
certain necklace here displayed had once been in his possession and
was now offered at exactly ten times what he had originally sold it
for. A certain cut steel brooch--very large and very handsome--was
designed by himself, and was first given as a remembrance to a friend.
Result--endless imitation by the best shops. He dallied over rubies
and emeralds, suggesting charming uses for them. And then finally we
came to the Casino--the Casino Municipale--with its baccarat chambers,
its great dining-rooms, its public lounging-room with such a world of
green wicker chairs and tables as I have never seen. The great piers
at Atlantic City are not so large. Being the height of the season, it
was of course filled to overflowing by a brilliant throng--cocottes
and gamblers drawn here from all parts of Europe; and tourists of all
nationalities.

Sir Scorp, as usual, in his gentle but decided way, raised an argument
concerning what we should have for dinner. The mere suggestion that it
should be _canard à la presse_ and champagne threw him into a dyspeptic
chill. “I will not pay for it. You can spend your money showing off if
you choose; but I will eat a simple meal somewhere else.”

“Oh, no,” protested Barfleur. “We are here for a pleasant evening. I
think it important that Dreiser should see this. It need not be _canard
à la presse_. We can have sole and a light Burgundy.”

So sole it was, and a light Burgundy, and a bottle of water for Sir
Scorp.




CHAPTER XXVIII

NICE


Not having as yet been in the _Cirque privé_ at Monte Carlo, I was
perhaps unduly impressed by the splendor of the rooms devoted to
gambling in this amazingly large casino. There were eight hundred or a
thousand people all in evening clothes, who had paid a heavy price for
the mere privilege of entering, and were now gathered about handsome
green-covered mahogany tables under glittering and ornate electroliers,
playing a variety of carefully devised gambling games with a fervor
that at times makes martyrs in other causes. To a humble-minded
American person like myself, unused to the high world of fashion, this
spectacle was, to say the least, an interesting one. Here were a dozen
nationalities represented by men and women whose hands were manicured
to perfection, whose toilets were all that a high social occasion might
require, their faces showing in every instance a keen understanding
of their world and how it works. Here in Nice, if you walk away from
these centers of social perfection, where health and beauty and
sophistication and money abound, the vast run of citizens are as
poverty-stricken as any; but this collection of nobility and gentry, of
millionaires, adventurers, intellectual prostitutes and savage beauties
is recruited from all over the world. I hold that is something to see.

The tables were fairly swarming with a fascinating throng all very
much alike in their attitude and their love of the game, but still
individual and interesting. I venture to say that any one of the
people I saw in this room, if you saw him in a crowd on the street,
would take your attention. A native force and self-sufficiency went
with each one. I wondered constantly where they all came from. It
takes money to come to the Riviera; it takes money to buy your way
into any gambling-room. It takes money to gamble; and what is more it
takes a certain amount of self-assurance and individual selection to
come here at all. By your mere presence you are putting yourself in
contact and contrast with a notable standard of social achievement.
Your intellectuality, your ability to take care of yourself, your
breeding and your subtlety are at once challenged--not consciously, but
unconsciously. Do you really belong here? the eyes of the attendants
ask you as you pass. And the glitter and color and life and beauty of
the room is a constant challenge.

It did not surprise me in the least that all these men and women in
their health and attractiveness carried themselves with cynical, almost
sneering hauteur. They might well do so--as the world judges these
material things--for they are certainly far removed from the rank and
file of the streets; and to see them extracting from their purses and
their pockets handfuls of gold, unfolding layers of crisp notes that
represented a thousand francs each, and with an almost indifferent
air laying them on their favorite numbers or combinations was to my
unaccustomed eye a gripping experience. Yet I was not interested in
gambling--only in the people who played.

I know that to the denizens of this world who are fascinated by
chance and find their amusement in such playing, this atmosphere is
commonplace. It was not so to me. I watched the women--particularly the
beautiful women--who strolled about the chambers with their escorts
solely to show off their fine clothes. You see a certain type of youth
here who seems to be experienced in this gay world that drifts from one
resort to another, for you hear such phrases as “Oh, yes, I saw her at
Aix-les-Bains,” or, “She was at Karlsbad last summer.” “Is that the
same fellow she was with last year? I thought she was living with --”
(this of a second individual). “My heaven, how well she keeps up!” or,
“This must be her first season here--I have never seen her before.”
Two or three of these young bloods would follow a woman all around the
rooms, watching her, admiring her beauty quite as a horseman might
examine the fine points of a horse. And all the while you could see
that she was keenly aware of the critical fire of these eyes.

[Illustration: “My heaven, how well she keeps up!”]

At the tables was another type of woman whom I had first casually
noticed at Monte Carlo, a not too good looking, rather practical, and
perhaps disillusioned type of woman--usually inclined to stoutness,
as is so often the case with women of indolent habits and no
temperament--although, now that I think of it, I have the feeling that
neither illusion nor disillusion have ever played much part in the
lives of such as these. They looked to me like women who, from their
youth up, had taken life with a grain of salt and who had never been
carried away by anything much--neither love, nor fashion, nor children,
nor ambition. Perhaps their keenest interest had always been money--the
having and holding of it. And here they sat--not good-looking, not
apparently magnetic--interested in chance, and very likely winning and
losing by turns, their principal purpose being, I fancy, to avoid the
dullness and monotony of an existence which they are not anxious to
endure. I heard one or two derogatory comments on women of this type
while I was abroad; but I cannot say that they did more than appeal
to my sympathies. Supposing, to look at it from another point of view,
you were a woman of forty-five or fifty. You have no family--nothing to
hold you, perhaps, but a collection of dreary relatives, or the _ennui_
of a conventional neighborhood with prejudices that are wearisome to
your sense of liberty and freedom. If by any chance you have money,
here on the Riviera is your resource. You can live in a wonderful
climate of sun and blue water; you can see nature clad in her daintiest
raiment the year round; you can see fashion and cosmopolitan types and
exchange the gossip of all the world; you can go to really excellent
restaurants--the best that Europe provides; and for leisure, from ten
o’clock in the morning until four or five o’clock the next morning,
you can gamble if you choose, gamble silently, indifferently, without
hindrance as long as your means endure.

If you are of a mathematical or calculating turn of mind you can
amuse yourself infinitely by attempting to solve the strange puzzle
of chance--how numbers fall and why. It leads off at last, I know,
into the abstrusities of chemistry and physics. The esoteric realms
of the mystical are not more subtle than the strange abnormalities of
psychology that are here indulged in. Certain people are supposed to
have a chemical and physical attraction for numbers or cards. Dreams
are of great importance. It is bad to sit by a losing person, good to
sit by a winning one. Every conceivable eccentricity of thought in
relation to personality is here indulged in; and when all is said and
done, in spite of the wonders of their cobwebby calculations, it comes
to about the same old thing--they win and lose, win and lose, win and
lose.

Now and then some interesting personality--stranger, youth, celebrity,
or other--wins heavily or loses heavily; in which case, if he plunges
fiercely on, his table will be surrounded by a curious throng, their
heads craning over each other’s shoulders, while he piles his gold on
his combinations. Such a man or woman for the time being becomes an
intensely dramatic figure. He is aware of the audacity of the thing he
is doing, and he moves with conscious gestures--the manner of a grand
seigneur. I saw one such later--in the _Cirque privé_ at Monte Carlo--a
red-bearded man of fifty--tall, intense, graceful. It was rumored that
he was a prince out of Russia--almost any one can be a prince out of
Russia at Monte Carlo! He had stacks of gold and he distributed it
with a lavish hand. He piled it in little golden towers over a score
of numbers; and when his numbers fell wrong his towers fell with them,
and the croupier raked great masses of metal into his basket. There was
not the slightest indication on his pale impassive face that the loss
or the gain was of the slightest interest to him. He handed crisp bills
to the clerk in charge of the bank and received more gold to play his
numbers. When he wearied, after a dozen failures--a breathing throng
watching him with moist lips and damp, eager eyes--he rose and strolled
forth to another chamber, rolling a cigarette as he went. He had lost
thousands and thousands.

The next morning it was lovely and sunshiny again. Sitting out on my
balcony high over the surrounding land, commanding as it did all of
Monte Carlo, the bay of Mentone and Cap Martin, I made many solemn
resolutions. This gay life here was meretricious and artificial,
I decided. Gambling was a vice, in spite of Sir Scorp’s lofty
predilection for it; it drew to and around it the allied viciousness of
the world, gormandizing, harlotry, wastefulness, vain-glory. I resolved
here in the cool morning that I would reform. I would see something of
the surrounding country and then leave for Italy where I would forget
all this.

I started out with Barfleur about ten to see the Oceanographical Museum
and to lunch at the Princess, but the day did not work out exactly
as we planned. We visited the Oceanographical Museum; but I found it
amazingly dull--the sort of a thing a prince making his money out of
gambling would endow. It may have vast scientific ramifications, but I
doubt it. A meager collection of insects and dried specimens quickly
gave me a headache. The only case that really interested me was the one
containing a half-dozen octopi of large size. I stood transfixed before
their bulbous centers and dull, muddy, bronze-green arms, studded with
suckers. I can imagine nothing so horrible as to be seized upon by one
of these things, and I fairly shivered as I stood in front of the case.
Barfleur contemplated solemnly the possibility of his being attacked by
one of them, monocle and all. He foresaw a swift end to his career.

We came out into the sunlight and viewed with relief, by contrast
with the dull museum, the very new and commonplace cathedral--oh,
exceedingly poorly executed--and the castle or palace or residence
of His Highness, the Prince of Monaco. I cannot imagine why Europe
tolerates this man with his fine gambling privileges unless it is that
the different governments look with opposition on the thought of any
other government having so fine a source of wealth. France should have
it by rights; and it would be suitable that the French temperament
should conduct such an institution. The palace of the Prince of Monaco
was as dull as his church and his museum; and the Monacoan Army drawn
up in front of his residence for their morning exercise looked like a
company of third-rate French policemen.

However I secured as fine an impression of the beauty of Monaco and
the whole coast from this height, as I received at any time during my
stay; for it is like the jewel of a ring projecting out of the sea. You
climb up to the Oceanographical Museum and the palace by a series of
stairways and walks that from time to time bring you out to the sheer
edge of the cliff overlooking the blue waters below. There is expensive
gardening done here, everywhere; for you find vines and flowers and
benches underneath the shade of palms and umbrella trees where you can
sit and look out over the sea. Lovely panoramas confront you in every
direction; and below, perhaps as far down as three and four hundred
feet, you can see and hear the waves breaking and the foam eddying
about the rocks. The visitor to Monte Carlo, I fancy, is not greatly
disturbed about scenery, however. Such walks as these are empty and
still while the Casino is packed to the doors. The gaming-tables are
the great center; and to these we ourselves invariably returned.




CHAPTER XXIX

A FIRST GLIMPSE OF ITALY


My days in Monte Carlo after this were only four, exactly. In spite of
my solemn resolutions of the morning the spirit of this gem-like world
got into my bones by three o’clock; and at four, when we were having
tea at the Riviera Palace Hotel high above the Casino, I was satisfied
that I should like to stay here for months. Barfleur, as usual, was
full of plans for enjoyment; and he insisted that I had not half
exhausted the charms of the place. We should go to some old monastery
at Laghet where miracles of healing were performed, and to Cannes and
Beaulieu in order to see the social life there.

A part of one of these days we spent viewing a performance in Mentone.
Another day Barfleur and I went to Laghet and Nice, beginning with a
luncheon at the Riviera Palace and winding up at the Hôtel des Fleurs.
The last day we were in the Casino, gambling cheerfully for a little
while, and then on the terrace viewing the pigeon shooting, which
Barfleur persistently refused to contemplate. This (to me) brutal
sport was evidently fascinating to many, for the popping of guns was
constant. It is so curious how radically our views differ in this world
as to what constitutes evil and good. To Scorp this was a legitimate
sport. The birds were ultimately destined for pies anyhow; why not kill
them here in this manner? To me the crippling of the perfect winged
things was a crime. I would never be one to hold a gun in such a sport.

It was this last day in the Café de Paris that Barfleur and I
encountered Marcelle and Mme. Y., our companions of that first dinner
in Paris. Barfleur was leaving for London, Scorp was to stay on at
Monte Carlo, and for the first time I faced the prospect of traveling
alone. Acting on impulse I turned to Marcelle and said: “Come with me
as far as Ventimiglia,” never thinking for a moment that she would.
“_Oui_,” she replied, “_oui, oui_,” and seemed very cheerful over the
prospect.

Marcelle arrived some fifteen minutes before my train was due, but
she was not to speak to me until we were on the train. It took some
manœuvering to avoid the suspicions of Scorp.

Barfleur left for the north at four-thirty, assuring me that we would
meet in Paris in April and ride at Fontainebleau, and that we would
take a walking tour in England. After he was gone, Scorp and I walked
to and fro and then it was that Marcelle appeared. I had to smile as I
walked with Scorp, thinking how wrathful he would have been if he had
known that every so often we were passing Marcelle, who gazed demurely
the other way. The platforms, as usual, were alive with passengers
with huge piles of baggage. My train was a half hour late and it was
getting dark. Some other train which was not bound for Rome entered,
and Marcelle signaled to know whether she was to get into that. I shook
my head and hunted up the Cook’s tourist agent, always to be found on
these foreign platforms, and explained to him that he was to go to the
young lady in the blue suit and white walking-shoes and tell her that
the train was a half hour late and ask her if she cared to wait. With
quite an American _sang-froid_ he took in the situation at once, and
wanted to know how far she was going. I told him Ventimiglia and he
advised that she get off at Garaban in order to catch the first train
back. He departed, and presently returned, cutting me out from the
company of Sir Scorp by a very wise look of the eye, and informed me
that the lady would wait and would go. I promptly gave him a franc for
his trouble. My pocket was bulging with Italian silver lire and paper
five- and ten-lire pieces which I had secured the day before. Finally
my train rolled in and I took one last look at the sea in the fading
light and entered. Sir Scorp gave me parting instructions as to simple
restaurants that I would find at different places in Italy--not the
showy and expensive cafés, beloved of Barfleur. He wanted me to save
money on food and have my portrait painted by Mancini, which I could
have done, he assured me, with a letter from him. He looked wisely
around the platform to see that there was no suspicious lady anywhere
in the foreground and said he suspected one might be going with me.

“Oh, Scorp,” I said, “how could you? Besides, I am very poor now.”

“The ruling passion--strong in poverty,” he commented, and waved me a
farewell.

I walked forward through the train looking for my belongings and
encountered Marcelle. She was eager to explain by signs that the Cook’s
man had told her to get off at Garaban.

“_M’sieur Thomas Cook, il m’a dit--il faut que je descends à
Garaban--pas Ventimiglia--Garaban._” She understood well enough that if
she wanted to get back to Monte Carlo early in the evening she would
have to make this train, as the next was not before ten o’clock.

I led the way to a table in the dining-car still vacant, and we
talked as only people can talk who have no common language. By the
most astonishing efforts Marcelle made it known that she would not
stay at Monte Carlo very long now, and that if I wanted her to come
to Florence when I got there she would. Also she kept talking about
Fontainebleau and horseback riding in April. She imitated a smart rider
holding the reins with one hand and clucking to the horse with her
lips. She folded her hands expressively to show how heavenly it would
be. Then she put her right hand over her eyes and waved her left hand
to indicate that there were lovely vistas which we could contemplate.
Finally she extracted all her bills from the Hôtel de Paris--and they
were astonishing--to show me how expensive her life was at Monte Carlo;
but I refused to be impressed. It did not make the least difference,
however, in her attitude or her mood. She was just as cheerful as
ever, and repeated “Avril--Fontainebleau,” as the train stopped and
she stepped off. She reached up and gave me an affectionate farewell
kiss. The last I saw of her she was standing, her arms akimbo, her head
thrown smartly back, looking after the train.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was due to a railroad wreck about twenty miles beyond Ventimiglia
that I owe my acquaintance with one of the most interesting men I have
met in years, a man who was very charming to me afterwards in Rome,
but before that I should like to relate how I first really entered
Italy. One afternoon, several days before, Barfleur and I paid a flying
visit to Ventimiglia, some twenty miles over the border, a hill city
and the agreed customs entry city between France and Italy. No train
leaving France in this region, so I learned, stopped before it reached
Ventimiglia, and none leaving Ventimiglia stopped before it entered
France, and once there customs inspectors seized upon one and examined
one’s baggage. If you have no baggage you are almost an object of
suspicion in Italy.

On the first visit we came to scale the walls of this old city which
was much like Eze and commanded the sea from a great eminence. But
after Eze it was not Ventimiglia that interested me so much as the fact
that Italy was so different from France. In landing at Fishguard I had
felt the astonishing difference between England and the United States.
In landing at Calais the atmosphere of England had fallen from me like
a cloak and France--its high color and enthusiasm--had succeeded to it.
Here this day, stepping off the train at Ventimiglia only a few miles
from Monte Carlo, I was once more astonished at the sharp change that
had come over the spirit of man. Here were Italians, not French, dark,
vivid, interesting little men who, it seemed to me, were so much more
inclined to strut and stare than the French that they appeared to be
vain. They were keen, temperamental, avid, like the French but strange
to say not so gay, so light-hearted, so devil-may-care.

Italy, it seemed to me at once, was much poorer than France and
Barfleur was very quick to point it out. “A different people,” he
commented, “not like the French, much darker and more mysterious. See
the cars--how poor they are. You will note that everywhere. And the
buildings, the trains--the rolling stock is not so good. Look at the
houses. The life here is more poverty-stricken. Italy is poor--very. I
like it and I don’t. Some things are splendid. My mother adores Rome. I
crave the French temperament. It is so much more light-hearted.” So he
rambled on.

It was all true--accurate and keenly observed. I could not feel that I
was anywhere save in a land that was seeking to rehabilitate itself but
that had a long way to go. The men--the officials and soldiery of whom
there were a legion clad in remarkable and even astonishing uniforms,
appealed to my eye, but the souls of them to begin with, did not take
my fancy. I felt them to be suspicious and greedy. Here for the first
time I saw the uniform of the Italian _bersaglieri_: smart-looking
in long capes, round hats of shiny leather with glossy green rooster
feathers, and carrying short swords.

This night as I crossed the border after leaving Garaban I thought
of all I had seen the day I came with Barfleur. When we reached
Ventimiglia it was pitch dark and being alone and speaking no Italian
whatsoever, I was confused by the thought of approaching difficulties.

Presently a customs inspector descended on me--a large, bearded
individual who by signs made me understand that I had to go to the
baggage car and open my trunk. I went. Torches supplied the only
light: I felt as though I were in a bandit’s cave. Yet I came through
well enough. Nothing contraband was found. I went back and sat down,
plunging into a Baedeker for Italian wisdom and wishing gloomily that I
had read more history than I had.

Somewhere beyond Ventimiglia the train came to a dead stop in the dark,
and the next morning we were still stalled in the same place. I had
risen early, under the impression that I was to get out quickly, but
was waved back by the porter who repeated over and over, “_Beaucoup de
retard!_” I understood that much but I did not understand what caused
it, or that I would not arrive in Pisa until two in the afternoon.
I went into the dining-car and there encountered one of the most
obstreperous English women that I have ever met. She was obviously of
the highly intellectual class, but so haughty in her manner and so
loud-spoken in her opinions that she was really offensive. She was
having her morning fruit and rolls and some chops and was explaining to
a lady, who was with her, much of the character of Italy as she knew
it. She was of the type that never accepts an opinion from any one,
but invariably gives her own or corrects any that may be volunteered.
At one time I think she must have been attractive, for she was
moderately tall and graceful, but her face had become waxy and sallow,
and a little thin--I will not say hard, although it was anything but
ingratiating. My one wish was that she would stop talking and leave
the dining-car, she talked so loud; but she stayed on until her friend
and her husband arrived. I took him to be her husband by the way she
contradicted him.

He was a very pleasing, intellectual person--the type of man, I
thought, who would complacently endure such a woman. He was certainly
not above the medium in height, quite well filled out, and decidedly
phlegmatic. I should have said from my first glance that he never took
any exercise of any kind; and his face had that interesting pallor
which comes from much brooding over the midnight oil. He had large,
soft, lustrous gray eyes and a mop of gray hair which hung low over
a very high white forehead. I must repeat here that I am the poorest
judge of people whom I am going to like of any human being. Now and
then I take to a person instantly, and my feeling endures for years. On
the other hand I have taken the most groundless oppositions based on
nothing at all to people of whom subsequently I have become very fond.
Perhaps my groundless opposition in this case was due to the fact that
the gentleman was plainly submissive and overborne by his loud-talking
wife. Anyhow I gave him a single glance and dismissed him from my
thoughts. I was far more interested in a stern, official-looking
Englishman with white hair who ordered his bottle of Perrier in a low,
rusty voice and cut his orange up into small bits with a knife.

Presently I heard a German explaining to his wife about a wreck
ahead. We were just starting now, perhaps twenty-five or thirty miles
from Ventimiglia, and were dashing in and out of rocky tunnels and
momentarily bursting into wonderful views of walled caves and sunlit
sweeps of sea. The hill-town, the striped basilica with its square,
many-arched campanile was coming into view. I was delighted to see
open plains bordered in the distance by snow-capped mountains, and
dotted sparsely with little huts of stone and brick--how old, Heaven
only knows. “Here once the Tuscan shepherds strayed.” As Barfleur
said, Italy was much poorer than France. The cars and stations seemed
shabbier, the dress of the inhabitants much poorer. I saw natives,
staring idly at the cars as we flashed past, or taking freight away
from the platforms in rude carts drawn by oxen. Many of the vehicles
appeared to be rattle-trap, dusty, unpainted; and some miles this
side of Genoa--our first stop--we ran into a region where it had been
snowing and the ground was covered with a wet slushy snowfall. After
Monte Carlo, with its lemon and orange trees and its lovely palms, this
was a sad comedown; and I could scarcely realize that we were not so
much as a hundred miles away and going southward toward Rome at that.
I often saw, however, distant hills crowned with a stronghold or a
campanile in high browns and yellows, which made up for the otherwise
poor foreground. Often we dashed through a cave, protected by high
surrounding walls of rock, where the palm came into view again and
where one could see how plainly these high walls of stone made for a
tropic atmosphere. I heard the loud-voiced English woman saying, “It is
such a delight to see the high colors again. England is so dreary. I
never feel it so much as when we come down through here.”

We were passing through a small Italian town, rich in whites, pinks,
browns and blues, a world of clothes-lines showing between rows of
buildings, and the crowds, pure Italian in type, plodding to and
fro along the streets. It was nice to see windows open here and the
sunshine pouring down and making dark shadows. I saw one Italian
woman, in a pink-dotted dress partly covered by a bright yellow apron,
looking out of a window; and then it was that I first got the tang of
Italy--the thing that I felt afterwards in Rome and Florence and Assisi
and Perugia--that wonderful love of color that is not rampant but just
deliciously selective, giving the eye something to feed on when it
least expects it. That is Italy!

When nearly all the diners had left the car the English lady left also
and her husband remained to smoke. He was not so very far removed from
me, but he came a little nearer, and said: “The Italians must have
their striped churches and their wash lines or they wouldn’t be happy.”

It was some time before he volunteered another suggestion, which was
that the Italians along this part of the coast had a poor region to
farm. I got up and left presently because I did not want to have
anything to do with his wife. I was afraid that I might have to talk to
her, which seemed to me a ghastly prospect.

I sat in my berth and read the history of art as it related to
Florence, Genoa, and Pisa, interrupting my paragraphs with glances at
every interesting scene. The value of the prospect changed first from
one side of the train to the other, and I went out into the corridor to
open a window and look out. We passed through a valley where it looked
as though grapes were flourishing splendidly, and my Englishman came
out and told me the name of the place, saying that it was good wine
that was made there. He was determined to talk to me whether I would
or no, and so I decided to make the best of it. It just occurred to
me that he might be the least bit lonely, and, seeing that I was very
curious about the country through which we were passing, that he might
know something about Italy. The moment it dawned upon me that he might
be helpful to me in this respect I began to ask him questions, and I
found his knowledge to be delightfully wide. He knew Italy thoroughly.
As we proceeded he described how the country was divided into virtually
three valleys, separated by two mountain ranges, and what the lines of
its early, almost prehistoric, development, had been. He knew where
it was that Shelley had come to spend his summers, and spots that had
been preferred by Browning and other famous Englishmen. He talked
of the cities that lie in a row down the center of Italy--Perugia,
Florence, Bologna, Modena, Piacenza and Milan--of the fact that
Italy had no educational system whatsoever and that the priests were
bitterly opposed to it. He was sorry that I was not going to stop at
Spezia, because at Spezia the climate was very mild and the gulf very
beautiful. He was delighted to think that I was going to stop at Pisa
and see the cathedral and the Baptistery. He commented on the charms
of Genoa--commercialized as it had been these later years--saying that
there was a very beautiful Campo Santo and that some of the palaces of
the quarreling Guelphs and Ghibellines still remaining were well worth
seeing. When we passed the quarries of Carrara he told me of their age
and of how endless the quantity of marble still was. He was going to
Rome with his wife and he wanted to know if I would not look him up,
giving me the name of a hotel where he lived by the season. I caught
a note of remarkable erudition; for we fell to discussing religion
and priestcraft and the significance of government generally, and he
astonished me by the breadth of his knowledge. We passed to the subject
of metaphysics from which all religions spring; and then I saw how
truly philosophic and esoteric he was. His mind knew no country, his
knowledge no school. He led off by easy stages into vague speculations
as to the transcendental character of race impulses; and I knew I had
chanced upon a profound scholar as well as a very genial person. I was
very sorry now that I had been so rude to him. By the time we reached
Pisa we were fast friends, and he told me that he had a distinguished
friend, now a resident of Assisi, and that he would give me a letter to
him which would bring me charming intellectual companionship for a day
or two. I promised to seek him out at his hotel; and as we passed the
Leaning Tower and the Baptistery, not so very distant from the railroad
track as we entered Pisa, he gave me his card. I recognized the name
as connected with some intellectual labors of a most distinguished
character and I said so. He accepted the recognition gracefully and
asked me to be sure and come. He would show me around Rome.

I gathered my bags and stepped out upon the platform at Pisa, eager to
see what I could in the few hours that I wished to remain.




CHAPTER XXX

A STOP AT PISA


Baedeker says that Pisa has a population of twenty-seven thousand two
hundred people and that it is a quiet town. It is. I caught the spell
of a score of places like this as I walked out into the open square
facing the depot. The most amazing botch of a monument I ever saw in
my life I saw here--a puffing, swelling, strutting representation of
Umberto I, legs apart, whiskers rampant, an amazing cockade, all the
details of a gaudy uniform, a breast like a pouter-pigeon--outrageous!
It was about twelve or thirteen times as large as an ordinary man and
not more than twelve or fifteen feet from the ground! He looked like
a gorgon, a monster to eat babies, ready to leap upon you with loud
cries. I thought, “In Heaven’s name! is this what Italy is coming to!
How can it brook such an atrocity?”

With the spirit of adventure strong within me I decided to find the
campanile and the cathedral for myself. I had seen it up the railroad
track, and, ignoring appealing guides with urgent, melancholy eyes,
I struck up walled streets of brown and gray and green with solid,
tight-closed, wooden shutters, cobble pavements and noiseless, empty
sidewalks. They were not exactly narrow, which astonished me a little,
for I had not learned that only the older portions of growing Italian
cities have narrow streets. All the newer sections which surround such
modern things as depots are wide and supposedly up to date. There was
a handsome trolley-car just leaving as I came out, a wide-windowed
shiny thing which illustrated just how fine trolley-cars can be, even
in Italy. I had learned from my Baedeker that Pisa was on the Arno.
I wanted to see the Arno because of Florence and Dante. Coming from
Ventimiglia I had read the short history of Pisa given in Baedeker--its
wars with Genoa, the building of its cathedral. It was interesting to
learn that the Pisans had expelled the Saracens from Sardinia in 1025,
and destroyed their fleet in 1063 near Palermo, that once they were the
most powerful adherents of the Ghibellines, and how terribly they were
defeated by the Genoese near Leghorn in 1284. I pumped up a vast desire
to read endless volumes concerning the history of Italy, now that I
was here on the ground, and when it could not be done on the instant.
My book told me that the great cathedral was erected after the naval
victory of the Pisans at Palermo and that the ancient bronze gates were
very wonderful. I knew of the Campo Santo with its sacred earth brought
from Palestine, and of the residence here of Niccolò Pisano. His famous
hexagonal pulpit in the Baptistery is a commonplace--almost as much so
as the Leaning Tower. I did not know that Galileo had availed himself
of the oblique position of the tower to make his experiments regarding
the laws of gravitation until I read it in my precious Baedeker, but it
was a fact none the less delightful for encountering it there.

Let me here and now, once and for all, sing my praises of Baedeker and
his books. When I first went abroad it was with a lofty air that I
considered Barfleur’s references to the fact that Baedeker on occasion
would be of use to me. He wanted me to go through Europe getting my
impressions quite fresh and not disturbed by too much erudition such
as could be gathered from books. He might have trusted me. My longing
for erudition was constantly great, but my willingness to burn the
midnight oil in order to get it was exceedingly small. It was only at
the last moment, when I was confronted with some utterly magnificent
object, that I thumbed feverishly through my one source of supply--the
ever-to-be-praised and blessed Karl Baedeker--his books. I think the
German temperament is at its best when it is gathering all the data
about anything and putting it in apple-pie order before you. I defy the
most sneering and supercilious scholars and savants to look at these
marvelous volumes and not declare them wonderful. There is no color in
Baedeker anywhere, no joke, no emotion, no artistic enthusiasm. It is
a plain statement of delightful fact--fact so pointless without the
object before you, so invaluable when you are standing open-mouthed
wondering what it is all about! Trust the industrious, the laborious,
the stupendous, the painstaking Baedeker to put his finger on the exact
fact and tell you not what you might, but what you must, know to really
enjoy it. Take this little gem from page 430 of his volume on northern
Italy. It concerns the famous Baptistery which I was so eagerly seeking.

    The interior (visitors knock at the principal entrance; adm.
    free) rests on eight columns and four piers, above which there
    is a single triforium. In the center is a marble octagonal
    _Font_ by Guido Bigarelli of Como (1246) and near it the famous
    hexagonal _PULPIT_ borne by seven columns, by Niccolò Pisano,
    1260. The reliefs (comp. p.p. XXXIX, 432) on the pulpit are:
    (1) Annunciation and Nativity; (2) Adoration of the Magi; (3)
    Presentation in the Temple; (4) Crucifixion; (5) Last Judgment;
    in the spandrels, Prophets and Evangelists; above the columns,
    the Virtues.--Fine echo.

Dry as dried potatoes, say you. Exactly. But go to Italy without a
Baedeker in your hand or precious knowledge stored up from other
sources and see what happens. Karl Baedeker is one of the greatest
geniuses Germany has ever produced. He knows how to give you what
you want, and has spread the fame of German thoroughness broadcast. I
count him a great human benefactor; and his native city ought to erect
a monument to him. Its base ought to be a bronze library stand full of
bronze Baedekers; and to this good purpose I will contribute freely and
liberally according to my means.

When I reached the Arno, as I did by following this dull vacant street,
I was delighted to stop and look at its simple stone bridges, its muddy
yellow water not unlike that of the New River in West Virginia, the
plain, still, yellow houses lining its banks as far as I could see. The
one jarring note was the steel railroad bridge which the moderns have
built over it. It was a little consoling to look at an old moss-covered
fortress now occupied as a division headquarters by the Italian army,
and at a charming old gate which was part of a fortified palace left
over from Pisa’s warring days. The potential force of Italy was
overcoming me by leaps and bounds, and my mind was full of the old and
powerful Italian families of which the Middle Ages are so redolent. I
could not help thinking of the fact that the Renaissance had, in a way,
its beginning here in the personality of Niccolò Pisano, and of how
wonderful the future of Italy may yet be. There was an air of fallow
sufficiency about it that caused me to feel that, although it might be
a dull, unworked field this year or this century, another might see
it radiant with power and magnificence. It is a lordly and artistic
land--and I felt it here at Pisa.

Wandering along the banks of the Arno, I came to a spot whence I could
see the collection of sacred buildings, far more sacred to art than
to religion. They were amazingly impressive, even from this distance,
towering above the low houses. A little nearer, standing on a space
of level grass, the boxing of yellow and brown and blue Italian houses
about them like a frame, they set my mouth agape with wonder and
delight. I walked into Pisa thinking it was too bad that any place so
dignified should have fallen so low as to be a dull, poverty-stricken
city; but I remained to think that if the Italians are wise (and they
_are_ wise and new-born also) they will once more have their tremendous
cities and their great artistic inheritances in the bargain. I think
now that perhaps of all the lovely things I saw abroad the cathedral
and tower and baptistery and campo santo of Pisa grouped as they are
in one lovely, spacious, green-sodded area, are the loveliest and
most perfect of all. It does not matter to me that the cathedral at
Pisa is not a true Gothic cathedral, as some have pointed out. It is
better than that--it is Italian Gothic; with those amazing artistic
conceptions, a bell-tower and a baptistery and a campo santo thrown in.
Trust the Italians to do anything that they do grandly, with a princely
lavishness.

As I stepped first into this open square with these exquisite jewels
of cream-colored stone pulsating under the rays of an evening sun, it
was a spectacle that evoked a rare thrill of emotion, such as great
art must always evoke. There they stood--fretted, fluted, colonnaded,
crowded with lovely traceries, studded with lovely marbles, and showing
in every line and detail all that loving enthusiasm which is the first
and greatest characteristic of artistic genius. I can see those noble
old first citizens who wanted Pisa to be great, calling to their aid
the genius of such men as Pisano and Bonannus of Pisa and William of
Innsbruck and Diotisalvi and all the noble company of talent that
followed to plan, to carve, to color and to decorate. To me it is a
far more impressive and artistic thing than St. Peter’s in Rome. It
has a reserve and an artistic subtlety which exceeds the finest Gothic
cathedral in the world. Canterbury, Amiens and Rouen are bursts of
imagination and emotion; but the collection of buildings at Pisa is
the reserved, subtle, princely calculation of a great architect and a
great artist. It does not matter if it represents the handiwork, the
judgment and the taste of a hundred men of genius. It may be without
the wildfire of a cathedral like that at Cologne, but it approximates
the high classic reserve of a temple of Pallas Athene. It is Greek
in its dignity and beauty, not Christian and Gothic in its fire and
zeal. As I think of it, I would not give it for anything I have seen;
I would not have missed it if I had been compelled to sacrifice almost
everything else; and the Italian Government has done well to take it
and all similar achievements under its protection and to declare that
however religion may wax or wane this thing shall not be disturbed. It
is a great, a noble, a beautiful thing; and as such should be preserved
forever.

The interior of the basilica was to me a soothing dream of beauty.
There are few interiors anywhere in this world that truly satisfy, but
this is one of them. White marble turned yellow by age is gloriously
satisfying. This interior, one hundred feet in diameter and one
hundred and seventy-nine feet high, has all the smooth perfection of
a blown bubble. Its curve recedes upward and inward so gracefully
that the eye has no quarrel with any point. My mind was fascinated by
the eight columns and four piers which seemingly support it all and
by the graceful open gallery or arcade in the wall resting above the
arches below. The octagonal baptismal font, so wide and so beautiful,
and the graceful pulpit by Pisano, with its seven columns and three
friendly-looking lions, is utterly charming. While I stood and stroked
the heads of these amiable-looking beasts, a guide who had seen me
enter came in, and without remark of any kind began slowly and clearly
to articulate the scale, in order that I might hear the “fine echo”
mentioned by Baedeker. Long practice had made him perfect, for by
giving each note sufficient space to swell and redouble and quadruple
itself he finally managed to fill the great chamber with a charming
harmony, rich and full, not unlike that of a wind-harp.

If I fell instantly in love with the Baptistery, I was equally moved
by the Leaning Tower--a perfect thing. If man is wise and thoughtful
he can keep the wonders of great beauty by renewing them as they wear;
but will he remain wise and thoughtful? So little is thought of true
beauty. Think of the guns thundering on the Parthenon and of Napoleon
carrying away the horses of St. Mark’s! I mounted the steps of the
tower (one hundred and seventy-nine feet, the same height as the
Baptistery), walking out on and around each of its six balustrades and
surveying the surrounding landscape rich in lovely mountains showing
across a plain. The tower tilts fourteen feet out of plumb, and as I
walked its circular arcades at different heights I had the feeling
that I might topple over and come floundering down to the grass below.
As I rose higher the view increased in loveliness; and at the top I
found an old bell-man who called my attention by signs to the fact that
the heaviest of the seven bells was placed on the side opposite the
overhanging wall of the tower to balance it. He also pointed in the
different directions which presented lovely views, indicating to the
west and southwest the mouth of the Arno, the Mediterranean, Leghorn
and the Tuscan Islands, to the north the Alps and Mount Pisani where
the Carrara quarries are, and to the south, Rome. Some Italian soldiers
from the neighboring barracks came up as I went down and entered the
cathedral, which interiorly was as beautiful as any which I saw
abroad. The Italian Gothic is so much more perfectly spaced on the
interior than the Northern Gothic and the great flat roof, coffered
in gold, is so much richer and more soothing in its aspect. The whole
church is of pure marble yellowed by age, relieved, however, by black
and colored bands.

I came away after a time and entered the Campo Santo, the loveliest
thing of its kind that I saw in Europe. I never knew, strange to
relate, that graveyards were made, or could be made, into anything
so impressively artistic. This particular ground was nothing more
than an oblong piece of grass, set with several cypress trees and
surrounded with a marble arcade, below the floor and against the walls
of which are placed the marbles, tombs and sarcophagi. The outer walls
are solid, windowless and decorated on the inside with those naïve,
light-colored frescoes of the pupils of Giotto. The inner wall is full
of arched, pierced windows with many delicate columns through which
you look to the green grass and the cypress trees and the perfectly
smooth, ornamented dome at one end. I have paid my tribute to the
cypress trees, so I will only say that here, as always, wherever I
saw them--one or many--I thrilled with delight. They are as fine
artistically as any of the monuments or bronze doors or carved pulpits
or perfect baptismal fonts. They belong where the great artistic
impulse of Italy has always put them--side by side with perfect things.
For me they added the one final, necessary touch to this realm of
romantic memory. I see them now and I hear them sigh.

I walked back to my train through highly colored, winding,
sidewalkless, quaint-angled streets crowded with houses, the façades
of which we in America to-day attempt to imitate on our Fifth Avenues
and Michigan Avenues and Rittenhouse Squares. The medieval Italians
knew so well what to do with the door and the window and the cornice
and the wall space. The size of their window is what they choose to
make it, and the door is instinctively put where it will give the last
touch of elegance. How often have I mentally applauded that selective
artistic discrimination and reserve which will use one panel of colored
stone or one niche or one lamp or one window, and no more. There is
space--lots of it--unbroken until you have had just enough; and then
it will be relieved just enough by a marble plaque framed in the
walls, a coat-of-arms, a window, a niche. I would like to run on in my
enthusiasm and describe that gem of a palace that is now the Palazzo
Communale at Perugia, but I will refrain. Only these streets in Pisa
were rich with angles and arcades and wonderful doorways and solid
plain fronts which were at once substantial and elegant. Trust the
Italian of an older day to do well whatever he did at all; and I for
one do not think that this instinct is lost. It will burst into flame
again in the future; or save greatly what it already possesses.




CHAPTER XXXI

FIRST IMPRESSIONS OF ROME


As we approached Rome in the darkness I was on the qui vive for my
first glimpse of it; and impatient with wonder as to what the morning
would reveal. I was bound for the Hotel Continental--the abode, for the
winter at least, of Barfleur’s mother, the widow of an Oxford don. I
expected to encounter a severe and conservative lady of great erudition
who would eye the foibles of Paris and Monte Carlo with severity.

“My mother,” Barfleur said, “is a very conservative person. She is
greatly concerned about me. When you see her, try to cheer her up, and
give her a good report of me. I don’t doubt you will find her very
interesting; and it is just possible that she will take a fancy to you.
She is subject to violent likes and dislikes.”

I fancied Mrs. Barfleur as a rather large woman with a smooth placid
countenance, a severe intellectual eye that would see through all my
shams and make-believes on the instant.

It was midnight before the train arrived. It was raining; and as I
pressed my nose to the window-pane viewing the beginning lamps, I saw
streets and houses come into view--apartment houses, if you please,
and street cars and electric arc-lights, and asphalt-paved streets,
and a general atmosphere of modernity. We might have been entering
Cleveland for any particular variation it presented. But just when I
was commenting to myself on the strangeness of entering ancient Rome
in a modern compartment car and of seeing box cars and engines, coal
cars and flat cars loaded with heavy material, gathered on a score of
parallel tracks, a touch of the ancient Rome came into view for an
instant and was gone again in the dark and rain. It was an immense,
desolate tomb, its arches flung heavenward in great curves, its rounded
dome rent and jagged by time. Nothing but ancient Rome could have
produced so imposing a ruin and it came over me in an instant, fresh
and clear like an electric shock, like a dash of cold water, that this
was truly all that was left of the might and glory of an older day.
I recall now with delight the richness of that sensation. Rome that
could build the walls and the baths in far Manchester and London,
Rome that could occupy the Ile-St.-Louis in Paris as an outpost, that
could erect the immense column to Augustus on the heights above Monte
Carlo, Rome that could reach to the uppermost waters of the Nile and
the banks of the Tigris and Euphrates and rule, was around me. Here it
was--the city to which St. Paul had been brought, where St. Peter had
sat as the first father of the Church, where the first Latins had set
up their shrine to Romulus and Remus, and worshiped the she-wolf that
had nourished them. Yes, this was Rome, truly enough, in spite of the
apartment houses and the street cars and the electric lights. I came
into the great station at five minutes after twelve amid a clamor of
Italian porters and a crowd of disembarking passengers. I made my way
to the baggage-room, looking for a Cook’s guide to inquire my way to
the Continental, when I was seized upon by one.

“Are you Mr. Dreiser?” he said.

I replied that I was.

“Mrs. Barfleur told me to say that she was waiting for you and that you
should come right over and inquire for her.”

I hurried away, followed by a laboring porter, and found her waiting
for me in the hotel lobby,--not the large, severe person I had
imagined, but a small, enthusiastic, gracious little lady. She told me
that my room was all ready and that the bath that I had demanded was
connected with it, and that she had ordered some coffee sent up, but
that I could have anything else that I chose. She began with a flood of
questions--how was her poor dear son, and her daughter in London? And
had we lost much money at Monte Carlo? And had we been very nice and
quiet in Paris? And had I had a pleasant trip? And was it very cold in
Paris? And would I like to go with her here and there for a few days,
particularly until I was acclimated and able to find my own way about?
I answered her freely and rapidly, for I took a real liking to her and
decided at once that I was going to have a very nice time--she was so
motherly and friendly. It struck me as delightful that she should wait
up for me, and see that I was welcomed and comfortably housed; I can
see her now with a loving memory in her charming gray silk dress and
black lace shawl.

The first morning I arose in Rome it was raining; but to my joy, in
an hour or two the sun came out and I saw a very peculiar city. Rome
has about the climate of Monte Carlo, except that it is a little more
changeable, and in the mornings and evenings quite chill. Around noon
every day it was very warm--almost invariably bright, deliciously
bright; but dark and cool where the buildings or the trees cast a
shadow. I was awakened by huzzaing which I learned afterwards was for
some officer who had lately returned from Morocco.

Like the English, the Italians are not yet intimately acquainted with
the bathroom, and this particular hotel reminded me of the one in
Manchester with its bath chambers as large as ordinary living-rooms. My
room looked out into an inner court, which was superimposed upon the
lobby of the hotel, and was set with palms and flowers which flourished
mightily. I looked out through an opening in this court to some brown
buildings over the way--brown as only the Italians know how to paint
them, and bustling with Italian life.

Mrs. Barfleur had kindly volunteered to show me about this first day,
and I was to meet her promptly at ten in the lobby. She wanted me
to take a street car to begin with, because there was one that went
direct to St. Peter’s along the Via Nazionale, and because there were
so many things she could show me that way. We went out into the public
square which adjoined the hotel and there it was that she pointed out
the Museo delle Terme, located in the ancient baths of Diocletian,
and assured me that the fragments of wall that I saw jutting out from
between buildings in one or two places dated from the Roman Empire. The
fragment of the wall of Servius Tullius which we encountered in the Via
Nazionale dates from 578 B. C., and the baths of Diocletian, so close
to the hotel, from 303 A. D. The large ruin that I had seen the night
before on entering the city was a temple to Minerva Medica, dating from
about 250 A. D. I shall never forget my sensation on seeing modern
stores--drug stores, tobacco stores, book stores, all with bright clean
windows, adjoining these very ancient ruins. It was something for the
first time to see a fresh, well-dressed modern throng going about its
morning’s business amid these rude suggestions of a very ancient life.

Nearly all the traces of ancient Rome, however, were apparently
obliterated, and you saw only busy, up-to-date thoroughfares, with
street cars, shops, and a gay metropolitan life generally. I have to
smile when I think that I mistook a section of the old wall of Servius
Tullius for the remnants of a warehouse which had recently been
removed. All the time in Rome I kept suffering this impression--that
I was looking at something which had only recently been torn down,
when as a matter of fact I was looking at the earlier or later walls
of the ancient city or the remnants of famous temples and baths. This
particular street car line on which we were riding was a revelation
in its way, for it was full of black-frocked priests in shovel hats,
monks in brown cowls and sandals, and Americans and English old maids
in spectacles who carried their Baedekers with severe primness and who
were, like ourselves, bound for the Vatican. The conductors, it struck
me, were a trifle more civil than the American brand, but not much; and
the native passengers were a better type of Italian than we usually see
in America. I sighted the Italian policeman at different points along
the way--not unlike the Parisian gendarme in his high cap and short
cape. The most striking characteristic, however, was the great number
of priests and soldiers who were much more numerous than policemen
and taxi drivers in New York. It seemed to me that on this very first
morning I saw bands of priests going to and fro in all directions, but,
for the rest of it, Rome was not unlike Monte Carlo and Paris combined,
only that its streets were comparatively narrow and its colors high.

Mrs. Barfleur was most kindly and industrious in her explanations. She
told me that in riding down this Via Nazionale we were passing between
those ancient hills, the Quirinale and the Viminale, by the Forum of
Trajan, the Gallery of Modern Art, the palaces of the Aldobrandini and
Rospigliosi, and a score of other things which I have forgotten. When
we reached the open square which faces St. Peter’s, I expected to be
vastly impressed by my first glimpse of the first Roman Church of the
world; but in a way I was very much disappointed. To me it was not
in the least beautiful, as Canterbury was beautiful, as Amiens was
beautiful, and as Pisa was beautiful. I was not at all enthusiastic
over the semicircular arcade in front with its immense columns. I knew
that I ought to think it was wonderful, but I could not. I think in a
way that the location and arrangement of the building does not do it
justice, and it has neither the somber gray of Amiens nor the delicate
creamy hue of the buildings of Pisa. It is brownish and gray by turns.
As I drove nearer I realized that it was very large--astonishingly
large--and that by some hocus-pocus of perspective and arrangement this
was not easily realizable. I was eager to see its interior, however,
and waived all exterior consideration until later.

As we were first going up the steps of St. Peter’s and across the
immense stone platform that leads to the door, a small Italian
wedding-party arrived, without any design of being married there,
however; merely to visit the various shrines and altars. The gentleman
was somewhat self-conscious in a long black frock coat and high hat--a
little, brown, mustached, dapper man whose patent leather shoes
sparkled in the sun. The lady was a rosy Italian girl, very much
belaced and besilked, with a pert, practical air; a little velvet-clad
page carried her train. There were a number of friends--the parents on
both sides, I took it--and some immediate relatives who fell solemnly
in behind, two by two; and together this little ant-like band crossed
the immense threshold. Mrs. Barfleur and I followed eagerly after--or
at least I did, for I fancied they were to be married here and I wanted
to see how it was to be done at St. Peter’s. I was disappointed,
however; for they merely went from altar to altar and shrine to shrine,
genuflecting, and finally entered the sacred crypt, below which the
bones of St. Peter are supposed to be buried. It was a fine religious
beginning to what I trust has proved a happy union.

St. Peter’s, if I may be permitted to continue a little on that curious
theme, is certainly the most amazing church in the world. It is not
beautiful--I am satisfied that no true artist would grant that; but
after you have been all over Europe and have seen the various edifices
of importance, it still sticks in your mind as astounding, perhaps the
most astounding of all. While I was in Rome I learned by consulting
guide-books, attending lectures and visiting the place myself, that
it is nothing more than a hodge-podge of the vagaries and enthusiasms
of a long line of able pontiffs. To me the Catholic Church has such a
long and messy history of intrigue and chicanery that I for one cannot
contemplate its central religious pretensions with any peace of mind.
I am not going into the history of the papacy, nor the internecine
and fratricidal struggles of medieval Italy; but what veriest tyro
does not grasp the significance of what I mean? Julius II, flanking
a Greek-cross basilica with a hexastyle portico to replace the
Constantinian basilica, which itself had replaced the oratory of St.
Anacletus on this spot, and that largely to make room for his famous
tomb which was to be the finest thing in it; Urban VIII melting down
the copper roof of the Panthéon portico in order to erect the showy
baldachino! I do not now recall what ancient temples were looted for
marble nor what popes did the looting, but that it was plentifully
done I am satisfied and Van Ranke will bear me out. It was Julius II
and Leo X who resorted to the sale of indulgences, which aided in
bringing about the Reformation, for the purpose of paying the enormous
expenses connected with the building of this lavish structure. Think
of how the plans of Bramante and Michelangelo and Raphael and Carlo
Maderna were tossed about between the Latin cross and the Greek cross
and between a portico of one form and a portico of another form!
Wars, heartaches, struggles, contentions--these are they of which St.
Peter’s is a memorial. As I looked at the amazing length--six hundred
and fifteen feet--and the height of the nave--one hundred and fifty-two
feet--and the height of the dome from the pavement in the interior to
the roof--four hundred and five feet--and saw that the church actually
contained forty-six immense altars and read that it contained seven
hundred and forty-eight columns of marble, stone or bronze, three
hundred and eighty-six statues and two hundred and ninety windows, I
began to realize how astounding the whole thing was. It was really so
large, and so tangled historically, and so complicated in the history
of its architectural development, that it was useless for me to attempt
to synchronize its significance in my mind. I merely stared, staggered
by the great beauty and value of the immense windows, the showy and
astounding altars. I came back again and again; but I got nothing save
an unutterable impression of overwhelming grandeur. It is far too rich
in its composition for mortal conception. No one, I am satisfied, truly
completely realizes how _grand_ it is. It answers to that word exactly.
Browning’s poem, “The Bishop Orders His Tomb at St. Praxed’s,” gives a
faint suggestion of what any least bit of it is like. Any single tomb
of any single pope--of which it seemed to me there were no end--might
have had this poem written about it. Each one appears to have desired
a finer tomb than the other; and I can understand the eager enthusiasm
of Sixtus V (1588), who kept eight hundred men working night and day on
the dome in order to see how it was going to look. And well he might.
Murray tells the story of how on one occasion, being in want of another
receptacle for water, the masons tossed the body of Urban VI out of
his sarcophagus, put aside his bones in a corner, and gave the ring
on his finger to the architect. The pope’s remains were out of their
receptacle for fifteen years or more before they were finally restored.

The Vatican sculptural and art museums were equally astonishing. I had
always heard of its eleven hundred rooms and its priceless collections;
but it was thrilling and delightful to see them face to face, all the
long line of Greek and Roman and medieval perfections, chiseled or
painted, transported from ruins or dug from the earth--such wonders as
the porphyry vase and Laocoon, taken from the silent underground rooms
of Nero’s house, where they had stood for centuries, unheeded, in all
their perfection; and the river god, representative of the Tiber. I
was especially interested to see the vast number of portrait busts of
Roman personalities--known and unknown--which gave me a face-to-face
understanding of that astounding people. They came back now or arose
vital before me--Claudius, Nerva, Hadrian, Faustina the elder, wife of
Antoninus Pius, Pertinax, whose birthplace was near Monte Carlo, Julius
Cæsar, Cicero, Antoninus Pius, Tiberius, Mark Antony, Aurelius Lepidus,
and a score of others. It was amazing to me to see how like the modern
English and Americans they were, and how practical and present-day-like
they appeared. It swept away the space of two thousand years as having
no significance whatever, and left you face to face with the far older
problem of humanity. I could not help thinking that the duplicates
of these men are on our streets to-day in New York and Chicago and
London--urgent, calculating, thinking figures--and that they are doing
to-day much as these forerunners did two thousand years before. I
cannot see the slightest difference between an emperor like Hadrian
and a banker like Morgan. And the head of a man like Lord Salisbury is
to be found duplicated in a score of sculptures in various museums
throughout the Holy City. I realized, too, that any one of hundreds of
these splendid marbles, if separated from their populous surroundings
and given to a separate city, meager in artistic possessions, would
prove a great public attraction. To him that hath shall be given,
however; and to those that have not shall be taken away even the
little that they have. And so it is that Rome fairly suffocates with
its endless variety of artistic perfection--one glory almost dimming
the other--while the rest of the world yearns for a crust of artistic
beauty and has nothing. It is like the Milky Way for jewels as
contrasted with those vast starless spaces that give no evidence of
sidereal life.

I wandered in this region of wonders attended by my motherly friend
until it was late in the afternoon, and then we went for lunch. Being
new to Rome, I was not satisfied with what I had seen, but struck
forth again--coming next into the region of Santa Maria Maggiore
and up an old stairway that had formed a part of a Medici palace
now dismantled--only to find myself shortly thereafter and quite by
accident in the vicinity of the Colosseum. I really had not known that
I was coming to it, for I was not looking for it. I was following idly
the lines of an old wall that lay in the vicinity of San Pietro in
Vincoli when suddenly it appeared, lying in a hollow at the foot of a
hill--the Esquiline. I was rejoicing in having discovered an old well
that I knew must be of very ancient date, and a group of cypresses
that showed over an ancient wall, when I looked--and there it was. It
was exactly as the pictures have represented it--oval, many-arched,
a thoroughly ponderous ruin. I really did not gain a suggestion of
the astonishing size of it until I came down the hill, past tin cans
that were lying on the grass--a sign of the modernity that possesses
Rome--and entered through one of the many arches. Then it came on
me--the amazing thickness of the walls, the imposing size and weight
of the fragments, the vast dignity of the uprising flights of seats,
and the great space now properly cleared, devoted to the arena. All
that I ever knew or heard of it came back as I sat on the cool stones
and looked about me while other tourists walked leisurely about, their
Baedekers in their hands. It was a splendid afternoon. The sun was
shining down in here; and it was as warm as though it were May in
Indiana. Small patches of grass and moss were detectable everywhere,
growing soft and green between the stones. The five thousand wild
beasts slaughtered in the arena at its dedication, which remained as
a thought from my high-school days, were all with me. I read up as
much as I could, watching several workmen lowering themselves by ropes
from the top of the walls, the while they picked out little tufts
of grass and weeds beginning to flourish in the earthy niches. Its
amazing transformations from being a quarry for greedy popes by whom
most of its magnificent marbles were removed, to its narrow escape
from becoming a woolen-mill operated by Sixtus V, were all brooded
over here. It was impossible not to be impressed by the thought of
the emperors sitting on their especial balcony; the thousands upon
thousands of Romans intent upon some gladiatorial feat; the guards
outside the endless doors, the numbers of which can still be seen,
giving entrance to separate sections and tiers of seats; and the vast
array of civic life which must have surged about. I wondered whether
there were venders who sold sweets or food and what their cries were
in Latin. One could think of the endless procession that wound its way
here on gala days. Time works melancholy changes.

I left as the sun was going down, tremendously impressed with the
wonder of a life that is utterly gone. It was like finding the
glistening shell of an extinct beetle or the suggestion in rocks of
a prehistoric world. As I returned to my hotel along the thoroughly
modern streets with their five- and six-story tenement and apartment
buildings, their street cars and customary vehicles, their newspaper,
flower and cigar stands, I tried to restore and keep in my mind a
suggestion of the magnificence that Gibbon makes so significant. It
was hard; for be one’s imagination what it will, it is difficult to
live outside of one’s own day and hour. The lights already beginning to
flourish in the smart shops, distracted my mood.




CHAPTER XXXII

MRS. Q. AND THE BORGIA FAMILY


“I am going to introduce you to such a nice woman,” Mrs. Barfleur told
me the second morning I was in Rome, in her very enthusiastic way.
“She is charming. I am sure you will like her. She comes from America
somewhere--New York, I think. Her husband is an author, I believe. I
heard so.” She chattered on in her genial, talk-making way. “I don’t
understand these American women; they go traveling about Europe without
their husbands in such a strange way. Now, you know in England we would
not think of doing anything of that kind.”

Mrs. Barfleur was decidedly conservative in her views and English in
manner and speech, but she had the saving proclivity of being intensely
interested in life, and realized that all is not gold that glitters.
She preferred to be among people who know and maintain good form, who
are interested in maintaining the social virtues as they stand accepted
and who, if they do not actually observe all of the laws and tenets
of society, at least maintain a deceiving pretense. She had a little
coterie of friends in the hotel, as I found, and friends outside, such
as artists, newspaper correspondents and officials connected with the
Italian court and the papal court. I never knew a more industrious
social mentor in the shape of a woman, though among men her son
outstripped her. She was apparently here, there and everywhere about
the hotel, in the breakfast-room, in the dining-room, in the card-room,
in the writing-room, greeting her friends, planning games, planning
engagements, planning sightseeing trips. She was pleasant, too;
delightful; for she knew what to do and when to do it, and if she was
not impelled by a large constructive motive of any kind, nevertheless
she had a sincere and discriminating love of the beautiful which caused
her to excuse much for the sake of art. I found her well-disposed,
kindly, sympathetic and very anxious to make the best of this sometimes
dull existence, not only for herself, but for every one else. I liked
her very much.

Mrs. Q. I found on introduction, to be a beautiful woman of perhaps
thirty-three or four, with two of the healthiest, prettiest,
best-behaved children I have ever seen. I found her to be an
intellectual and brilliant woman with an overwhelming interest in the
psychology of history and current human action.

“I trust I see an unalienated American,” I observed as Mrs. Barfleur
brought her forward, encouraged by her brisk, quizzical smile.

“You do, you do,” she replied smartly, “as yet. Nothing has happened to
my Americanism except Italy, and that’s only a second love.”

She had a hoarse little laugh which was nevertheless agreeable.
I felt the impact of a strong, vital temperament, self-willed,
self-controlled, intensely eager and ambitious. I soon discovered she
was genuinely interested in history, which is one of my great failings
and delights. She liked vital, unillusioned biography such as that of
Jean Jacques Rousseau’s Confessions, Cellini’s Diary, and the personal
reminiscences of various court favorites in different lands. She was
interested in some plays, but cared little for fiction, which I take
to be commendable. Her great passion at the moment, she told me, was
the tracing out in all its ramifications of the history and mental
attitude of the Borgia family especially Cæsar and Lucrezia--which I
look upon as a remarkable passion for a woman. It takes a strong,
healthy, clear-thinking temperament to enjoy the mental vagaries of
the Borgias--father, son and daughter. She had conceived a sincere
admiration for the courage, audacity, passion and directness of
action of Cæsar, to say nothing of the lymphatic pliability and lure
of Lucrezia, and the strange philosophic anarchism and despotic
individualism of their father, Alexander VI.

I wonder how much the average reader knows of the secret history of
the Borgias. It is as modern as desire, as strange as the strangest
vagaries of which the mind is capable. I am going to give here the
outline of the Borgia family history as Mrs. Q. crisply related it to
me, on almost the first evening we met, for I, like so many Americans,
while knowing something of these curious details in times past had but
the haziest recollection then. To be told it in Rome itself by a breezy
American who used the vernacular and who simply could not suppress her
Yankee sense of humor, was as refreshing an experience as occurred in
my whole trip. Let me say first that Mrs. Q. admired beyond words the
Italian subtlety, craft, artistic insight, political and social wisdom,
governing ability, and as much as anything their money-getting and
money-keeping capacities. The raw practicality of this Italian family
thrilled her.

    You will remember that Rodrigo Lanzol, a Spaniard who
    afterwards assumed the name of Rodrigo Borgia, because his
    maternal uncle of that name was fortunate enough to succeed
    to the papacy as Calixtus III, and could do him many good
    turns afterwards, himself succeeded to the papacy by bribery
    and other outrages under the title of Alexander VI. That was
    August 10, 1442. Before that, however, as nephew to Calixtus
    III, he had been made bishop, cardinal, and vice-chancellor of
    the Church solely because he was a relative and favored by his
    uncle; and all this before he was thirty-five. He had proceeded
    to Rome, established himself with many mistresses at his call
    in a magnificent palace, and at the age of thirty-seven, his
    uncle Calixtus III having died, was reprimanded by Pius II, the
    new pope, for his riotous and adulterous life. By 1470, when
    he was forty-nine he took to himself, as his favorite, Vanozza
    dei Cattani, the former wife of three different husbands. By
    Vanozza, who was very charming, he had four children, all of
    whom he prized highly--Giovanni, afterwards Duke of Gandia,
    born 1474; Cæsar, 1476; Lucrezia, 1480; Geoffreddo or Giuffré,
    born 1481 or 1482. There were other children--Girolamo,
    Isabella and Pier Luigi, whose parentage on the mother’s side
    is uncertain; and still another child, Laura, whom he acquired
    via Giulia Farnese, the daughter of the famous family of
    that name, who was his mistress after he tired, some years
    later, of Vanozza. Meanwhile his children had grown up or were
    fairly well-grown when he became pope, which opened the most
    astonishing chapter of the history of this strange family.

    Alexander was a curious compound of paternal affection, love
    of gold, love of women, vanity, and other things. He certainly
    was fond of his children or he would not have torn Italy with
    dissension in order to advantage them in their fortunes. His
    career is the most ruthless and weird of any that I know.

    He was no sooner pope (about April, 1493) than he proposed to
    carve out careers for his family--his favored children by his
    favorite mistress. In 1492, the same year he was made pope,
    he created Cæsar, his sixteen-year-old son, studying at Pisa,
    a cardinal, showing the state of the papacy in those days. He
    proposed to marry his daughter Lucrezia well, and having the
    year before, when she was only eleven, betrothed her to one Don
    Cherubin de Centelles, a Spaniard, he broke this arrangement
    and had Lucrezia married by proxy to Don Gasparo de Procida,
    son of the Count of Aversa, a man of much more importance, who,
    he thought, could better advance her fortune.

    Italy, however, was in a very divided and disorganized state.
    There was a King of Naples, a Duke of Venice, a Duke of Milan,
    a separate state life at Pisa, Genoa, Florence and elsewhere.
    In order to build himself up and become very powerful, and
    to give preferment to each of his sons, some of these states
    had to be conquered and controlled; and so the old gentleman,
    without conscience and without mercy except as suited his whim,
    was for playing politics, making war, exercising treachery,
    murdering, poisoning, persuading, bribing--anything and
    everything to obtain his ends. He must have been well thought
    of as a man of his word, for when he had made a deal with
    Charles VIII of France to assist him in invading and conquering
    Naples, the king demanded and obtained Cæsar, Alexander’s son,
    aged twenty-one, as a hostage for faithful performance of
    agreement. He had not taken him very far, however, before the
    young devil escaped and returned to Rome, where subsequently
    his father, finding it beneficial to turn against the King of
    France, did so.

    But to continue. While his father was politicking and
    trafficking in this way for the benefit of himself and his dear
    family, young Cæsar was beginning to develop a few thoughts
    and tendencies of his own. Alexander VI was planning to create
    fiefs or dukedoms out of the papal states and out of the
    Kingdom of Naples and give them to his eldest son, Giovanni,
    and his youngest, Giuffré. Cæsar would have none of this. He
    saw himself as a young cardinal being left out in the cold.
    Besides, there was a cause of friction between him and his
    brother Giovanni over the affections of their youngest brother
    Giuffré’s wife, Sancha. They were both sharing the latter’s
    favors, and so one day, in order to clear matters up and teach
    his father (whose favorite he was) where to bestow his benefits
    and so that he might have Sancha all to himself--he murdered
    his brother Giovanni. The latter’s body, after a sudden and
    strange absence, was found in the Tiber, knife-marked, and all
    was local uproar until the young cardinal was suspected, when
    matters quieted down and nothing more was thought of it. There
    was also thought to be some rivalry between Cæsar and Giovanni
    over the affections of their sister Lucrezia.

    After this magnificent evidence of ability, the way was clear
    for Cæsar. He was at once (July, 1497) sent as papal legate to
    Naples to crown Frederick of Aragon; and it was while there
    that he met Carlotta, the daughter of the king, and wanted
    to marry her. She would have none of him. “What, marry that
    priest, that bastard of a priest!” she is alleged to have said;
    and that settled the matter. This may have had something to
    do with Cæsar’s desire to get out of Holy Orders and return
    to civil life, for the next year (1498) he asked leave of
    the papal consistory not to be a cardinal any longer and was
    granted this privilege “for the good of his soul.” He then
    undertook the pleasant task, as papal legate, of carrying to
    Louis XII of France the pope’s bull annulling the marriage of
    Louis with Jeanne of France in order that he might marry Anne
    of Brittany. On this journey he met Charlotte d’Albret, sister
    of the King of Navarre, whom he married. He was given the duchy
    of Valentinois for his gracious service to Louis XII and,
    loaded with honors, returned to Rome in order to further his
    personal fortunes with his father’s aid.

    In the meanwhile there were a number of small principalities in
    Romagna, a territory near Milan, which his father Alexander VI
    was viewing with a covetous eye. One of these was controlled
    by Giovanni Sforza, Lord of Pesaro, whom Alexander, at a
    time when he wanted to pit the strength of Milan against the
    subtle machinations of the King of Naples--caused Lucrezia
    his daughter, then only thirteen years of age, to marry,
    her union with the Count of Aversa having by this time been
    severed. Alexander having won the friendship of the King of
    Naples, he decided to proceed against the princelings of
    Romagna and confiscated their property. Cæsar was tolled off
    as general to accomplish this for himself, being provided
    men and means. Young Sforza, who had married Lucrezia, found
    himself in a treacherous position,--his own brother-in-law,
    with the assistance of his father-in-law, plotting against
    his life,--and fled with his wife, the fair Lucrezia, aged
    fifteen, to Pesaro. There he was fought by Cæsar who, however,
    not having sufficient troops was checked for the time being and
    returned to Rome. A year or so later, Pope Alexander being in a
    gentler frame of mind--it was Christmas and he desired all his
    children about him--invited them all home, including Lucrezia
    and her husband. Then followed a series of magnificent fêtes
    and exhibitions in honor of all this at Rome, and the family,
    including the uncertain son-in-law, husband of Lucrezia, seemed
    to be fairly well united in bonds of peace.

    Unfortunately, however, a little later (1497) the pope’s mood
    changed again. He was now, after some intermediate quarrels,
    once more friendly with the King of Naples and decided that
    Sforza was no longer a fit husband for Lucrezia. Then came the
    annulment of this marriage and the remarriage of Lucrezia to
    Alphonso of Aragon, Duke of Bisceglie, a relative and favorite
    of the King of Naples, aged eighteen and handsome. But, alas!
    no sooner is this fairly begun than new complications arise.
    The pope thinks he sees an opportunity to destroy the power
    of Naples as a rival with the aid of the King of France, Louis
    XII. He lends assistance to the latter, who comes to invade
    Naples, and young Bisceglie, now fearing for his life at the
    hands of his treacherous father-in-law, deserts Rome and
    Lucrezia and flees. Louis XII proceeds against Naples. Spoleto
    falls and Lucrezia, Bisceglie’s wife, as representative of the
    pope (aged eighteen) is sent to receive the homage of Spoleto!

    But the plot merely thickens. There comes a nice point in here
    on which historians comment variously. Incest is the basis. It
    was one time assumed that Alexander, the father, during all
    these various shifts treated his daughter as his mistress.
    Her brother Cæsar also bore the same relation to her. Father
    and son were rivals, then, for the affections and favors of
    the daughter-sister. To offset the affections of the son the
    father has the daughter lure her husband, Bisceglie, back to
    Rome. From all accounts he was very much in love with his wife
    who was beautiful but dangerous because of her charms and the
    manner in which she was coveted by others. In 1499, when he was
    twenty and Cæsar twenty-three, he was lured back and the next
    year, because of Cæsar’s jealousy of his monopoly of his own
    wife (Cæsar being perhaps denied his usual freedom) Bisceglie
    was stabbed while going up the steps of the papal palace by
    Cæsar Borgia, his brother-in-law, and that in the presence of
    his father-in-law, Alexander VI, the pope of Rome. According
    to one account, on sight of Cæsar, jumping out from behind a
    column, Alphonso sought refuge behind Alexander, the pope, who
    spread out his purple robe to protect him, through which Cæsar
    drove his knife into the bosom of his brother-in-law. The dear
    old father and father-in-law was severely shocked. He was quite
    depressed, in fact. He shook his head dismally. The wound was
    not fatal, however. Bisceglie was removed to the house of a
    cardinal near-by, where he was attended by his wife, Lucrezia,
    and his sister-in-law, Sancha, wife of Giuffré, both of whom he
    apparently feared a little, for they were compelled first to
    partake of all food presented in order to prove that it was not
    poisoned. In this house--in this sick-chamber doorway--suddenly
    and unexpectedly one day there appears the figure of Cæsar.
    The ensuing scene (Lucrezia and Sancha present) is not given.
    Bisceglie is stabbed in his bed and this time dies. Is the
    crime avenged? Not at all. This is Papa Alexander’s own
    dominion. This is a family affair, and father is very fond of
    Cæsar, so the matter is hushed up.

    Witness the interesting final chapters. Cæsar goes off,
    October, 1500, to fight the princes in Romagna once more, among
    whom are Giovanni, and Sforza, one of Lucrezia’s ex-husbands.
    July, 1501, Alexander leaves the papal palace in Rome to fight
    the Colonna, one of the two powerful families of Rome, with the
    assistance of the other powerful family, the Orsini. In his
    absence Lucrezia, his beloved, is acting-pope! January first
    (or thereabouts), 1501, Lucrezia is betrothed to Alphonso, son
    and heir to Ercole d’Este, whose famous villa near Rome is
    still to be seen. Neither Alphonso nor his father was anxious
    for this union, but Papa Alexander, Pope of Rome, has set his
    heart on it. By bribes and threats he brings about a proxy
    marriage--Alphonso not being present--celebrated with great
    pomp at St. Peter’s. January, 1502, Lucrezia arrives in the
    presence of her new husband who falls seriously in love with
    her. Her fate is now to settle down, and no further tragedies
    befall on account of her, except one. A certain Ercole Strozzi,
    an Italian noble, appears on the scene and falls violently
    in love with her. She is only twenty-three or four even now.
    Alphonso d’Este, her new husband, becomes violently jealous
    and murders Ercole. Result: further peace until her death in
    1511 in her thirty-ninth year, during which period she had four
    children by Alphonso--three boys and one girl.

    As for brother Cæsar he was, unfortunately, leading a more
    checkered career. On December 21, 1502, when he was only
    twenty-six, as a general fighting the allied minor princes
    in Romagna, he caused to be strangled in his headquarters at
    Senigallia, Vitellozzo Viletti and Oliveralto da Fermo, two
    princelings who with others had conspired against him some time
    before at Perugia. Awed by his growing power, they had been so
    foolish as to endeavor to placate him by capturing Senigallia
    for him from their allies and presenting it to him and allowing
    themselves to be lured to his house by protestations of
    friendship. Result: strangulation.

    August 18, 1503, Father Borgia, Pope Alexander VI, charming
    society figure, polished gentleman, lover of the chase, patron
    of the arts, for whom Raphael, Michelangelo and Brabante had
    worked, breathes his last. He and Cæsar had fallen desperately
    sick at the same time of a fever. When Cæsar recovers
    sufficiently to attend to his affairs, things are already in a
    bad way. The cardinals are plotting to seat a pope unfriendly
    to the Borgias. The Spanish cardinals on whom he has relied
    do not prove friendly and he loses his control. The funds
    which Papa Borgia was wont to supply for his campaigns are no
    longer forthcoming. Pope Julius II succeeding to the throne,
    takes away from Cæsar the territories assigned to him by his
    father “for the honor of recovering what our predecessors have
    wrongfully alienated.” In May, 1504, having gone to Naples on
    a safe conduct for the Spanish governor of that city, he is
    arrested and sent to Spain, where he is thrown into prison.
    At the end of two years he manages to escape and flees to the
    court of his brother-in-law, the King of Navarre, who permits
    him to aid in besieging the castle of a refractory subject.
    Here, March 12, 1507, while Lucrezia elsewhere is peacefully
    residing with her spouse, he is killed.

I have given but a feeble outline of this charming Renaissance idyl.
Mixed in with it are constant murders or poisonings of wealthy
cardinals and the confiscation of their estates whenever cash for the
prosecution of Cæsar’s wars or the protection of papal properties
are needed. The uxorious and child-loving old pope was exceedingly
nonchalant about these little matters of human life. When he died there
was a fight over his coffin between priests of different factions and
mercenaries belonging to Cæsar Borgia. The coffin being too short,
his body was jammed down in it, minus his miter, and finally upset.
Think of so much ambition coming to such a shameful end! He achieved
his desire, however. He wrote his name large, if not in fame, at least
in infamy. He lived in astonishing grandeur and splendor. By his
picturesque iniquities he really helped to bring about the Reformation.
He had a curious affection for his children and he died immensely
rich--and, pope. The fair Lucrezia stands out as a strange chemical
magnet of disaster. To love her was fear, disappointment, or death. And
it was she and her brother Cæsar, who particularly interested Mrs. Q.,
although the aged Alexander amused her.

During her vigorous recital I forgot the corner drug store and modern
street cars of Rome, enthralled by the glamour of the ancient city. It
was a delight to find that we had an intellectual affinity in the study
of the vagaries of this strange phantasmagoria called human life, in
which to be dull is to be a bond-slave, and to be wise is to be a mad
philosopher, knowing neither right from wrong nor black from white.

Together Mrs. Q. and I visited the Borghese and Barberini Palaces, the
Villa Doria, the Villa Umberto, the Villa d’Este and the Appian Way. We
paid a return visit to the Colosseum and idled together in the gardens
of the Pincian, the paths of the Gianicolo, the gardens of the Vatican
and along the Tiber. It was a pleasure to step into some old court of
a palace where the walls were encrusted with fragments of monuments,
inscriptions, portions of sarcophagi and the like, found on the place
or in excavating, and set into the walls to preserve them--and to
listen to this clever, wholesome woman comment on the way the spirit of
life builds shells and casts them off. She was not in the least morbid.
The horror and cruelties of lust and ambition held no terrors for her.
She liked life as a spectacle.




CHAPTER XXXIII

THE ART OF SIGNOR TANNI


The first Sunday I was in Rome I began my local career with a visit
to the church of Santa Maria Maggiore, that faces the Via Cavour not
far from the Continental Hotel where I was stopping, and afterwards
San Prassede close beside it. After Canterbury, Amiens, Pisa and
St. Peter’s, I confess churches needed to be of great distinction
to interest me much; but this church, not so divinely harmonious,
exteriorly speaking, left me breathless with its incrustations of
marbles, bronzes, carvings, and gold and silver inlay. There is a kind
of beauty, or charm, or at least physical excitation, in contemplating
sheer gorgeousness which I cannot withstand, even when my sense of
proportion and my reason are offended, and this church had that. Many
of the churches in Rome have just this and nothing more. At least,
what else they may have I am blind to. It did not help me any to learn
as I did from Mrs. Barfleur, that it was very old, dating from 352
A. D., and that the blessed Virgin herself had indicated just where
this basilica in her honor was to be built by having a small, private
fall of snow which covered or outlined the exact dimensions of which
the church was to be. I was interested to learn that they had here
five boards of the original manger at Bethlehem inclosed in an urn of
silver and crystal which is exposed in the sacristy on Christmas Eve
and placed over the high altar on Christmas Day, and that here were
the tombs and chapels of Sixtus V and Paul V and Clement VIII of the
Borghese family and, too, a chapel of the Sforza family. Nevertheless
the hodge-podge of history, wealth, illusion and contention, to say
nothing of religious and social discovery, which go to make up a
church of this kind, is a little wearisome, not to say brain-achey,
when contemplated en masse. These churches! Unless you are especially
interested in a pope or a saint or a miracle or a picture or a monument
or an artist--they are nothing save intricate jewel-boxes; nothing more.

For the first five or six days thereafter I went about with a certain
Signor Tanni who was delivering peripatetic lectures at the principal
places of interest in Rome. This is a curious development of the
modern city, for so numerous are the travelers and so great their
interest in the history of Rome that they gladly pay the three to
twelve lire each, which is charged by the various lecturers for their
discussions and near-by trips. There was a Nashville, Tennessee,
chicken-and-egg merchant who, with his wife, was staying at our hotel
and who was making the matter of seeing Rome quite as much of a
business as that of chickens and eggs in Tennessee. He was a man of
medium height, dark, pale, neat, and possessed of that innate courtesy,
reserve, large-minded fairness and lively appreciation--within set
convictions--which is so characteristic of the native, reasonably
successful American. We are such innocent, pure-minded Greeks--most
of us Americans. In the face of such tawdry vulgarity and vileness
as comprises the underworld café life of Paris, or before such a
spectacle of accentuated craft, lust, brutality, and greed as that
presented by the Borgias, a man such as my chicken-merchant friend,
or any other American of his type, of whom there are millions, would
find himself utterly nonplused. It would be so much beyond his ken, or
intention, that I question whether he would see or understand it at
all if it were taking place before his very eyes. There is something so
childlike and pure about the attitude of many strong, able Americans
that I marvel sometimes that they do as well as they do. Perhaps
their very innocence is their salvation. I could not have told this
chicken-merchant and his wife, for instance, anything of the subtleties
of the underworld of Paris and Monte Carlo as I encountered them; and
if I had he would not have believed me, he would have recoiled from
it all as a burned child would recoil from fire. He was as simple and
interesting and practical as a man could be, and yet so thoroughly
efficient that at the age of forty-five he had laid by a competence and
was off on a three years’ tour of the world.

Mrs. Chicken Merchant was a large woman--very stout, very fair, very
cautious of her thoughts and her conduct, thoroughly sympathetic
and well-meaning. Before leaving her native town, she told me, she
had inaugurated a small library, the funds for which she had helped
collect. Occasionally she was buying engravings of famous historic
buildings, such as the Colosseum and the Temple of Vesta, which would
eventually grace the walls of the library. She and her husband felt
that they were educating themselves; and that they would return better
citizens, more useful to their country, for this exploration of the
ancient world. They had been going each day, morning and afternoon, to
some lecture or ancient ruin; and after I came they would seek me out
of an evening and tell me what they had seen. I took great satisfaction
in this, because I really liked them for their naïve point of view
and their thoroughly kindly and whole-hearted interest in life. It
flattered me to think that I was so acceptable to them and that we
should get along so well together. Frequently they invited me to their
table to dinner. On these occasions my friend would open a bottle of
wine, concerning which he had learned something since he had come
abroad.

It was Mr. and Mrs. Chicken Merchant who gave me a full description of
the different Roman lecturers, their respective merits, their prices,
and what they had to show. They had already been to the Forum, the
Palatine, the Colosseum and the House of Nero, St. Peter’s, the Castle
of St. Angelo, the Appian Way, the Catacombs and the Villa Frascati.
They were just going to the Villa d’Este and to Ostia, the old seaport
at the mouth of the Tiber. They were at great pains to get me to join
the companies of Signor Tanni who, they were convinced, was the best of
them all. “He tells you something. He makes you see it just as it was.
By George! when we were in the Colosseum you could just fairly see the
lions marching out of those doors; and that House of Nero, as he tells
about it, is one of the most wonderful things in the world.”

I decided to join Signor Tanni’s classes at once, and persuaded Mrs.
Barfleur and Mrs. Q. to accompany me at different times. I must say
that in spite of the commonplaceness of the idea my mornings and
afternoons with Signor Tanni and his company of sightseers proved as
delightful as anything else that befell me in Rome. He was a most
interesting person, born and brought up, as I learned, at Tivoli near
the Villa d’Este, where his father controlled a small inn and livery
stable. He was very stocky, very dark, very ruddy, and very active.
Whenever we came to the appointed rendezvous where his lecture was to
begin, he invariably arrived, swinging his coat-tails, glancing smartly
around with his big black eyes, rubbing and striking his hands in a
friendly manner, and giving every evidence of taking a keen interest in
his work. He was always polite and courteous without being officious,
and never for a moment either dull or ponderous. He knew his subject
thoroughly of course; but what was much better, he had an eye for the
dramatic and the spectacular. I shall never forget how in the center of
the Forum Romanum he lifted the cap from the ancient manhole that opens
into the Cloaca Maxima and allowed us to look in upon the walls of
that great sewer that remains as it was built before the dawn of Roman
history. Then he exclaimed dramatically: “The water that Cæsar and the
emperors took their baths in no doubt flowed through here just as the
water of Roman bath-tubs does to-day!”

On the Palatine, when we were looking at the site of the Palace of
Elagabalus, he told how that weird worthy had a certain well, paved
at the bottom with beautiful mosaic, in order that he might leap down
upon it and thus commit suicide, but how he afterwards changed his
mind--which won a humorous smile from some of those present and from
others a blank look of astonishment. In the House of Nero, in one
of those dark underhill chambers, which was once out in the clear
sunlight, but now, because of the lapse of time and the crumbling of
other structures reared above it, is deep under ground, he told how
once, according to an idle legend, Nero had invited some of his friends
to dine and when they were well along in their feast, and somewhat
intoxicated, no doubt, it began to rain rose leaves from the ceiling.
Nothing but delighted cries of approval was heard for this artistic
thought until the rose leaves became an inch thick on the floor and
then two and three, and four and five inches thick, when the guests
tried the doors. They were locked and sealed. Then the shower continued
until the rose leaves were a foot deep, two feet deep, three feet deep,
and the tables were covered. Later the guests had to climb on tables
and chairs to save themselves from their rosy bath; but when they had
climbed this high they could climb no higher, for the walls were smooth
and the room was thirty feet deep. By the time the leaves were ten
feet deep the guests were completely covered; but the shower continued
until the smothering weight of them ended all life.--An ingenious but
improbable story.

No one of Signor Tanni’s wide-mouthed company seemed to question
whether this was plausible or not; and one American standing next to me
exclaimed, “Well, I’ll be switched!” My doubting mind set to work to
figure out how I could have overcome this difficulty if I had been in
the room; and in my mind I had all the associated guests busy tramping
down rose leaves in order to make the quantity required as large as
possible. My idea was that I could tire Nero out on this rose-leaf
proposition. The picture of these noble Romans feverishly trampling
down the fall of rose leaves cheered me greatly.

After my first excursion with Signor Tanni I decided to take his
whole course; and followed dutifully along behind him, listening
to his interesting and good-natured disquisitions, during many
delightful mornings and afternoons in the Forum, on the Palatine, in
the Catacombs, on the Appian Way and in the Villas at Frascati and
Tivoli! I shall never forget how clearly and succinctly the crude
early beginnings and characteristics of Christianity came home to me
as I walked in the Catacombs and saw the wretched little graves hidden
away in order that they might not be desecrated, and the underground
churches where converts might worship free from molestation and
persecution.

On the Palatine the fact that almost endless palaces were built one on
top of the other, the old palace leveled by means of the sledge and
the crowbar and the new one erected upon the smoothed-over space,
is easily demonstrated. They find the remains of different ruins in
different layers as they dig down, coming eventually to the early
sanctuaries of the kings and the federated tribes. It is far more
interesting to walk through these old ruins and underground chambers
accompanied by some one who loves them, and who is interested in them,
and who by fees to the state servitors has smoothed the way, so that
the ancient forgotten chambers are properly lighted for you, than
it is to go alone. And to have a friendly human voice expatiating
on the probable arrangement of the ancient culinary department and
how it was all furnished, is worth while. I know that the wonder and
interest of the series of immense, dark rooms which were once the
palace of Nero, and formerly were exposed to the light of day, before
the dust and incrustation of centuries had been heaped upon them, but
which now underlie a hill covered by trees and grass, came upon me
with great force because of these human explanations; and the room in
which, in loneliness and darkness for centuries stood the magnificent
group of Laocoon and the porphyry vase now in the Vatican, until some
adventuring students happened to put a foot through a hole, thrilled
me as though I had come upon them myself. Until one goes in this way
day by day to the site of the Circus Maximus, the Baths of Caracalla,
the ruins of Hadrian’s Villa, the Castle of St. Angelo, the Forum,
the Palatine and the Colosseum, one can have no true conception of
that ancient world. When you realize, by standing on the ground and
contemplating these ancient ruins and their present fragments, that the
rumored immensity of them in their heyday and youth is really true,
you undergo an ecstasy of wonder; or if you are of a morbid turn you
indulge in sad speculations as to the drift of life. I cannot tell you
how the mosaics from the palace of Germanicus on the Palatine affected
me, or how strange I felt when the intricacies of the houses of
Caligula and Tiberius were made clear. To walk through the narrow halls
which they trod, to know truly that they ruled in terror and with the
force of murder, that Caligula waylaid and assaulted and killed, for
his personal entertainment, in these narrow alleys which were then the
only streets, and where torches borne by hand furnished the only light,
is something. A vision of the hugeness and audacity of Hadrian’s villa
which now stretches apparently, one would say, for miles, the vast
majority of its rooms still unexcavated and containing what treasures
Heaven only knows, is one of the strangest of human experiences. I
marveled at this vast series of rooms, envying the power, the subtlety
and the genius which could command it. Truly it is unbelievable--one of
those things which stagger the imagination. One can hardly conceive how
even an emperor of Rome would build so beautifully and so vastly. Rome
is so vast in its suggestion that it is really useless to apostrophize.
That vast empire that stretched from India to the Arctic was surely
fittingly represented here; and while we may rival the force and
subtlety and genius and imagination of these men in our day, we will
not truly outstrip them. Mind was theirs--vast, ardent imagination; and
if they achieved crudely it was because the world was still young and
the implements and materials of life were less understood. They were
the great ones--the Romans. We must still learn from them.




CHAPTER XXXIV

AN AUDIENCE AT THE VATICAN


The remainder of my days in Rome were only three or four. I had seen
much of it that has been in no way indicated here. True to my promise
I had looked up at his hotel my traveling acquaintance, the able and
distinguished Mr. H., and had walked about some of the older sections
of the city hearing him translate Greek and Latin inscriptions of
ancient date with the ease with which I put my ordinary thought into
English. Together we visited the Farnese Palace, the Mamertine Prison,
the Temple of Vesta, Santa Maria in Cosmedin and other churches too
numerous and too pointless to mention. It was interesting to me to note
the facility of his learning and the depth of his philosophy. In spite
of the fact that life, in the light of his truly immense knowledge of
history and his examination of human motives, seemed a hodge-podge of
contrarieties and of ethical contradictions, nevertheless he believed
that through all the false witness and pretense and subtlety of the
ages, through the dominating and apparently guiding impulses of lust
and appetite and vanity, seemingly untrammeled by mercy, tenderness or
any human consideration, there still runs a constructive, amplifying,
art-enlarging, life-developing tendency which is comforting,
dignifying, and purifying, making for larger and happier days for
each and all. It did not matter to him that the spectacle as we read
it historically is always one of the strong dominating the weak, of
the strong battling with the strong, of greed, hypocrisy and lying.
Even so, the world was moving on--to what he could not say,--we were
coming into an ethical understanding of things. The mass was becoming
more intelligent and better treated. Opportunity, of all sorts, was
being more widely diffused, even if grudgingly so. We would never again
have a Nero or a Caligula he thought--not on this planet. He called my
attention to that very interesting agreement between leading families
of the Achæan League in lower Greece in which it was stipulated that
the “ruling class should be honored like gods” and that the subject
class should be “held in subservience like beasts.” He wanted to know
if even a suspicion of such an attitude to-day would not cause turmoil.
I tried out his philosophy by denying it, but he was firm. Life was
better to him, not merely different as some might take it to be.

I gave a dinner at my hotel one evening in order to pay my respects
to those who had been so courteous to me and put it in charge of Mrs.
Barfleur, who was desirous of nothing better. She was fond of managing.
Mrs. Q. sat at my left and Mrs. H. at my right and we made a gay hour
out of history, philosophy, Rome, current character and travel. The
literary executor of Oscar Wilde was present, Mr. Oscar Browning, and
my Greek traveler and merchant, Mr. Bouris. An American publisher and
his wife, then in Rome, had come, and we were as gay as philosophers
and historians and antiquaries can be. Mr. H. drew a laugh by
announcing that he never read a book under 1500 years of age any more,
and the literary executor of Oscar Wilde told a story of the latter
to the effect that the more he contemplated his own achievements, the
more he came to admire himself, and the less use he had for other
people’s writings. One of the most delightful stories I have heard in
years was told by H. who stated that an Italian thief, being accused
of stealing three rings from the hands of a statue of the Virgin that
was constantly working miracles, had declared that, as he was kneeling
before her in solemn prayer, the Virgin had suddenly removed the rings
from her finger and handed them to him. But the priests who were
accusing him (servitors of the Church) and the judge who was trying
him, all firm believers, would not accept this latest development of
the miraculous tendencies of the image and he was sent to jail. Alas!
that true wit should be so poorly rewarded.

One of the last things I did in Rome was to see the Pope. When I came
there, Lent was approaching, and I was told that at this time the
matter was rather difficult. None of my friends seemed to have the
necessary influence, and I had about decided to give it up, when one
day I met the English representative of several London dailies who
told me that sometimes, under favorable conditions, he introduced his
friends, but that recently he had overworked his privilege and could
not be sure. On the Friday before leaving, however, I had a telephone
message from his wife, saying that she was taking her cousin and would
I come. I raced into my evening clothes though it was early morning and
was off to her apartment in the Via Angelo Brunetti, from which we were
to start.

Presentation to the Pope is one of those dull formalities made
interesting by the enthusiasm of the faithful and the curiosity of
the influential who are frequently non-catholic, but magnetized by
the amazing history of the Papacy and the scope and influence of the
Church. All the while that I was in Rome I could not help feeling
the power and scope of this organization--much as I condemn its
intellectual stagnation and pharisaism. Personally I was raised in
the Catholic Church, but outgrew it at an early age. My father died
a rapt believer in it and I often smile when I think how impossible
it would have been to force upon him the true history of the Papacy
and the Catholic hierarchy. His subjugation to priestly influence was
truly a case of the blind leading the blind. To him the Pope was truly
infallible. There could be no wrong in any Catholic priest, and so on
and so forth. The lives of Alexander VI and Boniface VIII would have
taught him nothing.

In a way, blind adherence to principles is justifiable, for we have not
as yet solved the riddle of the universe and one may well agree with
St. Augustine that the vileness of the human agent does not invalidate
the curative or corrective power of a great principle. An evil doctor
cannot destroy the value of medicine; a corrupt lawyer or judge cannot
invalidate pure law. Pure religion and undefiled continues, whether
there are evil priests or no, and the rise and fall of the Roman
Catholic hierarchy has nothing to do with what is true in the teachings
of Christ.

It was interesting to me as I walked about Rome to see the indications
or suggestions of the wide-spread influence of the Catholic
Church--priests from England, Ireland, Spain, Egypt and monks from
Palestine, the Philippines, Arabia, and Africa. I was standing in the
fair in the Campo dei Fiori, where every morning a vegetable-market
is held and every Wednesday a fair where antiquities and curiosities
of various lands are for sale, when an English priest, seeing my
difficulties in connection with a piece of jewelry, offered to
translate for me and a little later a French priest inquired in French
whether I spoke his language. In the Colosseum I fell in with a German
priest from Baldwinsville, Kentucky, who invited me to come and see a
certain group of Catacombs on a morning when he intended to say mass
there, which interested me but I was prevented by another engagement;
and at the Continental there were stopping two priests from Buenos
Ayres; and so it went. The car lines which led down the Via Nazionale
to St. Peter’s and the Vatican was always heavily patronized by
priests, monks, and nuns; and I never went anywhere that I did not
encounter groups of student-priests coming to and from their studies.

This morning that we drove to the papal palace at eleven was as usual
bright and warm. My English correspondent and his wife, both extremely
intelligent, had been telling of the steady changes in Rome, its rapid
modernization, the influence of the then Jewish mayor in its civic
improvement and the waning influence of the Catholics in the matter of
local affairs. “All Rome is probably Catholic,” he said, “or nearly so;
but it isn’t the kind of Catholicism that cares for papal influence in
political affairs. Why, here not long ago, in a public speech the mayor
charged that the papacy was the cause of Rome’s being delayed at least
a hundred years in its progress and there was lots of applause. The
national parliament which meets here is full of Catholics but it is not
interested in papal influence. It’s all the other way about. They seem
to be willing to let the Pope have his say in spiritual matters but he
can’t leave the Vatican and priests can’t mix in political affairs very
much.”

I thought, what a change from the days of Gregory VII and even the
popes of the eighteenth century!

The rooms of the Vatican devoted to the Pope--at least those to which
the public is admitted at times of audience seemed to me merely large
and gaudy without being impressive. One of the greatest follies of
architecture, it seems to me, is the persistent thought that mere
size without great beauty of form has any charm whatever. The Houses
of Parliament in England are large but they are also shapely. As much
might be said for the Palais Royal in Paris though not for the Louvre
and almost not for Versailles. The Vatican is another great splurge of
nothing--mere size without a vestige of charm as to detail.

All I remember of my visit was that arriving at the palace entrance
we were permitted by papal guards to ascend immense flights of steps,
that we went through one large red room after another where great
chandeliers swung from the center and occasional decorations or
over-elaborate objects of art appeared on tables or pedestals. There
were crowds of people in each room, all in evening dress, the ladies
with black lace shawls over their heads, the men in conventional
evening clothes. Over-elaborately uniformed guards stood about, and
prelates of various degrees of influence moved to and fro. We took our
station in a room adjoining the Pope’s private chambers where we waited
patiently while various personages of influence and importance were
privately presented.

It was dreary business waiting. Loud talking was not to be thought
of, and the whispering on all sides as the company increased was
oppressive. There was a group of ladies from Venice who were obviously
friends of the Holy Father’s family. There were two brown monks,
barefooted and with long gray beards, patriarchal types, who stationed
themselves by one wall near the door. There were three nuns and a
mother superior from somewhere who looked as if they were lost in
prayer. This was a great occasion to them. Next to me was a very
official person in a uniform of some kind who constantly adjusted his
neck-band and smoothed his gloved hands. Some American ladies, quite
severe and anti-papistical if I am not mistaken, looked as if they were
determined not to believe anything they saw, and two Italian women of
charming manners had in tow an obstreperous small boy of say five or
six years of age in lovely black velvet, who was determined to be as
bad and noisy as he could. He beat his feet and asked questions in a
loud whisper and decided that he wished to change his place of abode
every three seconds; all of which was accompanied by many “sh-sh-es”
from his elders and whisperings in his ear, severe frowns from the
American ladies and general indications of disapproval, with here and
there a sardonic smile of amusement.

Every now and then a thrill of expectation would go over the company.
The Pope was coming! Papal guards and prelates would pass through the
room with speedy movements and it looked as though we would shortly
be in the presence of the vicar of Christ. I was told that it was
necessary to rest on one knee at least, which I did, waiting patiently
the while I surveyed the curious company. The two brown monks were
appropriately solemn, their heads bent. The sisters were praying.
The Italian ladies were soothing their restive charge. I told my
correspondent-friend of the suicide of a certain journalist, whom he
and his wife knew, on the day that I left New York--a very talented but
adventurous man; and he exclaimed: “My God! don’t tell that to my wife.
She’ll feel it terribly.” We waited still longer and finally in sheer
weariness began jesting foolishly; I said that it must be that the Pope
and Merry del Val, the Pope’s secretary, were inside playing jackstones
with the papal jewels. This drew a convulsive laugh from my newspaper
friend--I will call him W.--who began to choke behind his handkerchief.
Mrs. W. whispered to me that if we did not behave we would be put out
and I pictured myself and W. being unceremoniously hustled out by the
forceful guards, which produced more laughter. The official beside me,
who probably did not speak English, frowned solemnly. This produced
a lull, and we waited a little while longer in silence. Finally the
sixth or seventh thrill of expectation produced the Holy Father, the
guards and several prelates making a sort of aisle of honor before
the door. All whispering ceased. There was a rustle of garments as
each one settled into a final sanctimonious attitude. He came in, a
very tired-looking old man in white wool cassock and white skull cap,
a great necklace of white beads about his neck and red shoes on his
feet. He was stout, close knit, with small shrewd eyes, a low forehead,
a high crown, a small, shapely chin. He had soft, slightly wrinkled
hands, the left one graced by the papal ring. As he came in he uttered
something in Italian and then starting on the far side opposite the
door he had entered came about to each one, proffering the hand which
some merely kissed and some seized on and cried over, as if it were the
solution of a great woe or the realization of a too great happiness.
The mother superior did this and one of the Italian ladies from Venice.
The brown monks laid their foreheads on it and the official next to me
touched it as though it were an object of great value.

I was interested to see how the Supreme Pontiff--the Pontifex Maximus
of all the monuments--viewed all this. He looked benignly but rather
wearily down on each one, though occasionally he turned his head away,
or, slightly interested, said something. To the woman whose tears
fell on his hands he said nothing. With one of the women from Venice
he exchanged a few words. Now and then he murmured something. I could
not tell whether he was interested but very tired, or whether he was
slightly bored. Beyond him lay room after room crowded with pilgrims
in which this performance had to be repeated. Acquainted with my
newspaper correspondent he gave no sign. At me he scarcely looked at
all, realizing no doubt my critical unworthiness. At the prim, severe
American woman he looked quizzically. Then he stood in the center of
the room and having uttered a long, soft prayer, which my friend W.
informed me was very beautiful, departed. The crowd arose. We had to
wait until all the other chambers were visited by him and until he
returned guarded on all sides by his soldiers and disappeared. There
was much conversation, approval, and smiling satisfaction. I saw him
once more, passing quickly between two long lines of inquisitive,
reverential people, his head up, his glance straight ahead and then he
was gone.

We made our way out and somehow I was very glad I had come. I had
thought all along that it really did not make any difference whether I
saw him or not and that I did not care, but after seeing the attitude
of the pilgrims and his own peculiar mood I thought it worth while.
Pontifex Maximus! The Vicar of Christ! What a long way from the
Catacomb-worshiping Christians who had no Pope at all, who gathered
together “to sing responsively a hymn to Christ as to a God” and
who bound themselves by a sacramental oath to commit no thefts, nor
robberies, nor adulteries, nor break their word, nor deny a deposit
when called upon, and who for nearly three hundred years had neither
priest nor altar, nor bishop nor Pope, but just the rumored gospels of
Christ.




CHAPTER XXXV

THE CITY OF ST. FRANCIS


The Italian hill-cities are such a strange novelty to the American of
the Middle West--used only to the flat reaches of the prairie, and the
city or town gathered primarily about the railway-station. One sees a
whole series of them ranged along the eastern ridge of the Apennines
as one travels northward from Rome. All the way up this valley I had
been noting examples on either hand but when I got off the train
at Assisi I saw what appeared to be a great fortress on a distant
hill--the sheer walls of the church and monastery of St. Francis. It
all came back to me, the fact that St. Francis had been born here of
a well-to-do father, that he had led a gay life in his youth, had had
his “vision”--his change of heart--which caused him to embrace poverty,
the care of the poor and needy and to follow precisely that idealistic
dictum which says: “Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth,...
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven,... for where your
treasure is there will your heart be also.” I had found in one of the
little books I had with me, “Umbrian Towns,” a copy of the prayer that
he devised for his Order which reads:

    Poverty was in the crib and like a faithful squire she kept
    herself armed in the great combat Thou didst wage for our
    redemption. During Thy passion she alone did not forsake Thee.
    Mary, Thy Mother, stopped at the foot of the cross, but poverty
    mounted it with Thee and clasped Thee in her embrace unto the
    end; and when Thou wast dying of thirst as a watchful spouse
    she prepared for Thee the gall. Thou didst expire in the ardor
    of her embraces, nor did she leave Thee when dead, O Lord
    Jesus, for she allowed not Thy body to rest elsewhere than in
    a borrowed grave. O poorest Jesus, the grace I beg of Thee is
    to bestow on me the treasure of the highest poverty. Grant
    that the distinctive mark of our Order may be never to possess
    anything as its own under the sun for the glory of Thy name and
    to have no other patrimony than begging.

I wonder if there is any one who can read this without a thrill of
response. This world sets such store by wealth and comfort. We all
batten on luxury so far as our means will permit,--many of us wallow
in it; and the thought of a man who could write such a prayer as that,
and live it, made my hair tingle to the roots. I can understand Pope
Innocent III’s saying that the rule offered by St. Francis and his
disciples to ordinary mortals was too severe, but I can also conceive
the poetic enthusiasm of a St. Francis. I found myself on the instant
in the deepest accord with him, understanding how it was that he
wanted his followers not to wear a habit, and to work in the fields
as day-laborers, begging only when they could not earn their way. The
fact that he and his disciples had lived in reed huts on the site of
Santa Maria degli Angeli, the great church which stands in the valley
near the station, far down from the town, and had practised the utmost
austerity, came upon me as a bit of imaginative poetry of the highest
sort. Before the rumbling bus arrived, which conveyed me and several
others to the little hotel, I was thrilling with enthusiasm for this
religious fact, and anything that concerned him interested me.

In some ways Assisi was a disappointment because I expected something
more than bare picturesqueness; it is very old and I fancy, as modern
Italy goes, very poor. The walls of the houses are for the most part
built of dull gray stone. The streets climbed up hill and down dale,
hard, winding, narrow, stony affairs, lined right to the roadway by
these bare, inhospitable-looking houses. No yards, no gardens--at least
none visible from the streets, but, between walls, and down street
stairways, and between odd angles of buildings the loveliest vistas
of the valley below, where were spread great orchards of olive trees,
occasional small groups of houses, distant churches and the mountains
on the other side of the valley. Quite suited to the self-abnegating
spirit of St. Francis, I thought,--and I wondered if the town had
changed greatly since his day--1182!

As I came up in the bus, looking after my very un-St. Francis-like
luggage, and my precious fur overcoat, I encountered a pale,
ascetic-looking French priest,--“L’Abbé Guillmant, Vicar General,
Arras (Pas-de-Calais), France;” he wrote out his address for me,--who,
looking at me over his French Baedeker every now and then, finally
asked in his own tongue, “Do you Speak French?” I shook my head
deprecatingly and smiled regretfully. “Italiano?” Again I had to shake
my head. “C’est triste!” he said, and went on reading. He was clad in a
black cassock that reached to his feet, the buttons ranging nicely down
his chest, and carried only a small portmanteau and an umbrella. We
reached the hotel and I found that he was stopping there. Once on the
way up he waved his hand out of the window and said something. I think
he was indicating that we could see Perugia further up the valley. In
the dining-room where I found him after being assigned to my room he
offered me his bill-of-fare and indicated that a certain Italian dish
was the best.

This hotel to which we had come was a bare little affair. It was new
enough--one of Cook’s offerings,--to which all the tourists traveling
under the direction of that agency are sent. The walls were quite
white and clean. The ceilings of the rooms were high, over high
latticed windows and doors. My room, I found, gave upon a balcony which
commanded the wonderful sweep of plain below.

The dining-room contained six or seven other travelers bound either
southward towards Rome or northward towards Perugia and Florence. It
was a rather hazy day, not cold and not warm, but cheerless. I can
still hear the clink of the knives and forks as the few guests ate in
silence or conversed in low tones. Travelers in this world seem almost
innately fearsome of each other, particularly when they are few in
number and meet in some such out-of-the-way place as this. My Catholic
Abbé was longing to be sociable with me, I could feel it; but this
lack of a common tongue prevented him, or seemed to. As I was leaving
I asked the proprietor to say to him that I was sorry that I did not
speak French, that if I did I would be glad to accompany him; and
he immediately reported that the Abbé said, Would I not come along,
anyhow? “He haav ask,” said the proprietor, a small, stout, dark man,
“weel you not come halong hanyhow?”

“Certainly,” I replied. And so the Abbé Guillmant and I, apparently not
understanding a word of each other’s language, started out sightseeing
together--I had almost said arm-in-arm.

I soon learned that while my French priest did not speak English, he
read it after a fashion, and if he took plenty of time he could form
an occasional sentence. It took time, however. He began,--in no vivid
or enthusiastic fashion, to be sure,--to indicate what the different
things were as we went along.

Now the sights of Assisi are not many. If you are in a hurry and do
not fall in love with the quaint and picturesque character of it and
its wonderful views you can do them all in a day,--an afternoon if
you skimp. There is the church of St. Francis with its associated
monastery (what an anachronism a monastery seems in connection with
St. Francis, who thought only of huts of branches, or holes in the
rocks!) with its sepulcher of the saint in the lower church, and the
frescoed scenes from St. Francis’s life by Giotto in the upper; the
church of St. Clare (Santa Chiara) with its tomb and the body of that
enthusiastic imitator of St. Francis; the Duomo, or cathedral, begun
in 1134--a rather poor specimen of a cathedral after some others--and
the church of St. Damiano, which was given--the chapel of it--to St.
Francis by the Benedictine monks of Monte Subasio soon after he had
begun his work of preaching the penitential life. There is also the
hermitage of the Carceri, where, in small holes in the rocks the early
Franciscans led a self-depriving life, and the new church raised on the
site of the house belonging to Pietro Bernardone, the father of St.
Francis, who was in the cloth business.

I cannot say that I followed with any too much enthusiasm the involved
architectural, historical, artistic, and religious details of these
churches and chapels. St. Francis, wonderful “jongleur of God” that he
was, was not interested in churches and chapels so much as he was in
the self-immolating life of Christ. He did not want his followers to
have monasteries in the first place. “Carry neither gold nor silver
nor money in your girdles, nor bag, nor two coats, nor sandals, nor
staff, for the workman is worthy of his hire.” I liked the church
of St. Francis, however, for in spite of the fact that it is gray
and bare as befits a Franciscan edifice, it is a double church--one
below the other, and seemingly running at right angles; and they are
both large Gothic churches, each complete with sacristy, choir nave,
transepts and the like. The cloister is lovely, in the best Italian
manner, and through the interstices of the walls wonderful views of the
valley below may be secured. The lower church, gray and varied in its
interior, is rich in frescoes by Cimabue and others dealing with the
sacred vows of the Franciscans, the upper (the nave) decorated with
frescoes by Giotto, illustrating the life of St. Francis. The latter
interested me immensely because I knew by now that these were almost
the beginning of Italian and Umbrian religious art and because Giotto,
from the evidences his work affords, must have been such a naïve and
pleasant old soul. I fairly laughed aloud as I stalked about this
great nave of the upper church--the Abbé was still below--at some of
the good old Italian’s attempts at characterization and composition.
It is no easy thing, if you are the founder of a whole line of great
artists, called upon to teach them something entirely new in the way
of life-expression, to get all the wonderful things you see and feel
into a certain picture or series of pictures, but Giotto tried it
and he succeeded very well, too. The decorations are not great, but
they are quaint and lovely, even if you have to admit at times that
an apprentice of to-day could draw and compose better. He couldn’t
“intend” better, however, nor convey more human tenderness and feeling
in gay, light coloring,--and therein lies the whole secret!

There are some twenty-eight of these frescoes ranged along the lower
walls on either side--St. Francis stepping on the cloak of the poor
man who, recognizing him as a saint, spread it down before him; St.
Francis giving his cloak to the poor nobleman; St. Francis seeing the
vision of the palace which was to be reared for him and his followers;
St. Francis in the car of fire; St. Francis driving the devils away
from Arezzo; St. Francis before the Sultan; St. Francis preaching to
the birds; and so on. It was very charming. I could not help thinking
what a severe blow has been given to religious legend since those
days however; nowadays, except in the minds of the ignorant, saints
and devils and angels and stigmata and holy visions have all but
disappeared. The grand phantasmagoria of religious notions as they
relate to the life of Christ have all but vanished, for the time
being anyhow, even in the brains of the masses, and we are having an
invasion of rationalism or something approximating it, even at the
bottom. The laissez-faire opportunism which has characterized the
men at the top in all ages is seeping down to the bottom. Via the
newspaper and the magazine, even in Italy--in Assisi--something of
astronomy, botany, politics and mechanics, scientifically demonstrated,
is creeping in. The inflow seems very meager as yet, a mere trickle,
but it has begun. Even in Assisi I saw newspapers and a weekly in
a local barber-shop. The natives--the aged ones--very thin, shabby
and pale, run into the churches at all hours of the day to prostrate
themselves before helpless saints; but nevertheless the newspapers are
in the barber-shops. Old Cosimo Medici’s truism that governments are
not managed by paternosters is slowly seeping down. We have scores of
men in the world to-day as able as old Cosimo Medici and as ruthless.
We will have hundreds and thousands after a while, only they will be
much more circumspect in their ruthlessness and they will work hard
for the State. Perhaps there won’t be so much useless praying before
useless images when that time comes. The thought of divinity _in the
individual_ needs to be more fully developed.

While I was wandering thus and ruminating I was interested at the
same time in the faithful enthusiasm my Abbé was manifesting in the
details of the art of this great church. He followed me about for a
time in my idle wanderings as I studied the architectural details of
this one of the earliest of Gothic churches and then he went away by
himself, returning every so often to find in my guide-book certain
passages which he wanted me to read, pointing to certain frescoes and
exclaiming, “Giotto!” “Cimabue!” “Andrea da Bologna!” Finally he said
in plain English, but very slowly: “Did--you--ever--read--a--life--of
St. Francis?”

I must confess that my knowledge of the intricacies of Italian art,
aside from the lines of its general development, is slim. Alas,
dabbling in Italian art, and in art in general, is like trifling with
some soothing drug--the more you know the more you want to know.

We continued our way and finally we found a Franciscan monk who spoke
both English and French--a peculiar-looking man, tall, and athletic,
who appeared to be very widely experienced in the world, indeed. He
explained more of the frescoes, the history of the church, the present
state of the Franciscans here, and so on.

The other places Franciscan, as I have said, did not interest me
so much, though I accompanied my friend, the Abbé, wherever he was
impelled to go. He inquired about New York, looking up and waving his
hand upward as indicating great height, great buildings, and I knew he
was thinking of our skyscrapers. “American bar!” he said, twittering to
himself like a bird, “American stim-eat [steam heat]; American ’otel.”

I had to smile.

Side by side we proceeded through the church of St. Clare, the Duomo,
the new church raised on the site of the house that belonged to Pietro
Bernardone, the father of the saint; and finally to the Church of San
Damiano, where after St. Francis had seen the vision of the new life,
he went to pray. After it was given him by the Benedictines he set
about the work of repairing it and when once it was in charge of the
poor Clares, after resigning the command of his order, he returned
thither to rest and compose the “Canticle of the Law.” I never knew
until I came to Assisi what a business this thing of religion is in
Italy--how valuable the shrines and churches of an earlier day are
to its communities. Thousands of travelers must pass this way each
year. They support the only good hotels. Travelers from all nations
come, English, French, German, American, Russian, and Japanese. The
attendants at the shrines reap a small livelihood from the tips of
visitors and they are always there, lively and almost obstreperous
in their attentions. The oldest and most faded of all the guides and
attendants throng about the churches and shrines of Assisi, so old and
faded that they seemed almost epics of poverty. My good priest was for
praying before every shrine. He would get down on his knees and cross
himself, praying four or five minutes while I stood irreligiously in
the background, looking at him and wondering how long he would be.
He prayed before the tomb of St. Francis in the Franciscan church;
before the body of St. Clare (clothed in a black habit and shown behind
a glass case), in the church of St. Clare; before the altar in the
chapel of Saint Damiano, where St. Francis had first prayed; and so
on. Finally when we were all through, and it was getting late evening,
he wanted to go down into the valley, near the railroad station, to
the church of Santa Maria degli Angeli, where the cell in which St.
Francis died, is located. He thought I might want to leave him now,
but I refused. We started out, inquiring our way of the monks at Saint
Damiano and found that we had to go back through the town. One of the
monks, a fat, bare-footed man, signaled me to put on my hat, which I
was carrying because I wanted to enjoy the freshness of the evening
wind. It had cleared off now, the sun had come out and we were enjoying
one of those lovely Italian spring evenings which bring a sense of
childhood to the heart. The good monk thought I was holding my hat out
of reverence to his calling. I put it on.

We went back through the town and then I realized how lovely the life
of a small Italian town is, in spring. Assisi has about five thousand
population. It was cool and pleasant. Many doorways were now open,
showing evening fires within the shadows of the rooms. Some children
were in the roadways. Carts and wains were already clattering up from
the fields below and church-bells--the sweetest echoes from churches
here and there in the valley and from those here in Assisi--exchanged
melodies. We walked fast because it was late and when we reached the
station it was already dusk. The moon had risen, however, and lighted
up this great edifice, standing among a ruck of tiny homes. A number
of Italian men and women were grouped around a pump outside--those
same dark, ear-ringed Italians with whom we are now so familiar in
America. The church was locked, but my Abbé went about to the cloister
gate which stood at one side of the main entrance, and rang a bell.
A brown-cowled monk appeared and they exchanged a few words. Finally
with many smiles we were admitted into a moonlit garden, where cypress
trees and box and ilex showed their lovely forms, and through a long
court that had an odor of malt, as if beer were brewed here, and so
finally by a circuitous route into the main body of the church and
the chapel containing the cell of St. Francis. It was so dark by now
that only the heaviest objects appeared distinctly, the moonlight
falling faintly through several of the windows. The voices of the monks
sounded strange and sonorous, even though they talked in low tones. We
walked about looking at the great altars, the windows, and the high,
flat ceiling. We went into the chapel, lined on either side by wooden
benches, occupied by kneeling monks, and lighted by one low, swinging
lamp which hung before the cell in which St. Francis died. There was
much whispering of prayers here and the good Abbé was on his knees in
a moment praying solemnly.

St. Francis certainly never contemplated that his beggarly cell would
ever be surrounded by the rich marbles and bronze work against which
his life was a protest. He never imagined, I am sure, that in spite of
his prayer for poverty, his Order would become rich and influential
and that this, the site of his abstinence, would be occupied by one of
the most ornate churches in Italy. It is curious how barnacle-wise the
spirit of materiality invariably encrusts the ideal! Christ died on
the cross for the privilege of worshiping God “in spirit and in truth”
after he had preached the sermon on the mount,--and then you have the
gold-incrusted, power-seeking, wealth-loving Papacy, with women and
villas and wars of aggrandizement and bastardy among the principal
concomitants. And following Francis, imitating the self-immolation of
the Nazarene, you have another great Order whose churches and convents
in Italy are among the richest and most beautiful. And everywhere you
find that lust for riches and show and gormandizing and a love of
seeming what they are not, so that they may satisfy a faint scratching
of the spirit which is so thickly coated over that it is almost
extinguished.

Or it may be that the ideal is always such an excellent device
wherewith to trap the unwary and the unsophisticated. “Feed them with
a fine-seeming and then put a tax on their humble credulity” seems to
be the logic of materialism in regard to the mass. Anything to obtain
power and authority! Anything to rule! And so you have an Alexander
VI, Vicar of Christ, poisoning cardinals and seizing on estates that
did not belong to him: leading a life of almost insane luxury; and a
Medicean pope interested in worldly fine art and the development of a
pagan ideal.




CHAPTER XXXVI

PERUGIA


We returned at between seven and eight that night. After a bath I
sat out on the large balcony, or veranda, commanding the valley, and
enjoyed the moonlight. The burnished surface of the olive trees, and
brown fields already being plowed with white oxen and wooden shares,
gave back a soft glow that was somehow like the patina on bronze. There
was a faint odor of flowers in the wind and here and there lights
gleaming. From some street in the town I heard singing and the sound of
a mandolin. I slept soundly.

At breakfast,--coffee, honey, rolls and butter,--my Abbé gave me his
card. He was going to Florence. He asked the hotel man to say to me
that he had had a charming time and would I not come to France and
visit him? “When I learn to speak French,” I replied, smiling at him.
He smiled and nodded. We shook hands and parted.

After breakfast I called a little open carriage such as they use in
Paris and Monte Carlo and was off for Spello; and he took an early
omnibus and caught his train.

On this trip which Barfleur had recommended as offering a splendid
view of cypresses I was not disappointed: about some villa there
was an imposing architectural arrangement of them and an old Roman
amphitheater nearby--the ruins of it--bespoke the prosperous Roman
life which had long since disappeared. Spello, like Assisi, and beyond
it Perugia, (all these towns in this central valley in fact) was set
on top of a high ridge, and on some peak of it at that. As seen from
the valley below it was most impressive. Close at hand, in its narrow
winding streets it was simply strange, outre, almost bizarre, and yet a
lovely little place after its kind. Like Assisi it was very poor--only
more so. A little shrine to some old Greek divinity was preserved here
and at the very top of all, on the extreme upper round of the hill
was a Franciscan monastery which I invaded without a by your leave
and walked in its idyllic garden. There and then I decided that if
ever fortune should permit I would surely return to Spello and write
a book, and that this garden and monastery should be my home. It was
so eerie here--so sweet. The atmosphere was so wine-like. I wandered
about under green trees and beside well-kept flower beds enjoying the
spectacle until suddenly peering over a wall I beheld a small garden on
a slightly lower terrace and a brown-cowled monk gathering vegetables.
He had a basket on his arm, his hood back over his shoulders--a busy
and silent anchorite. After a time as I gazed he looked and smiled,
apparently not startled by my presence and then went on with his work.
“When I come again,” I said, “I shall surely live here and I’ll get
him to cook for me.” Lovely thought! I leaned over other walls and saw
in the narrow, winding streets below natives bringing home bundles of
fagots on the backs of long-eared donkeys, and women carrying water.
Very soon, I suppose, a car line will be built and the uniformed
Italian conductors will call “Assisi!” “Perugia!” and even “The Tomb of
St. Francis!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Of all the hill-cities I saw in Italy certainly Perugia was the
most remarkable, the most sparkling, the most forward in all things
commercial. It stands high, very high, above the plain as you come in
at the depot and a wide-windowed trolley-car carries you up to the
principal square, the Piazza Vittorio Emanuele, stopping in front
of the modern hotels which command the wide sea-like views which
the valley presents below. Never was a city so beautifully located.
Wonderful ridges of mountains fade into amazing lavenders, purples,
scarlets, and blues, as the evening falls or the dawn brightens. If
I were trying to explain where some of the painters of the Umbrian
school, particularly Perugino, secured their wonderful sky touches,
their dawn and evening effects, I should say that they had once lived
at Perugia. Perugino did. It seemed to me as I wandered about it the
two days that I was there that it was the most human and industrious
little city I had ever walked into. Every living being seemed to
have so much to do. You could hear, as you went up and down the
streets--streets that ascend and descend in long, winding stairways,
step by step, for blocks--pianos playing, anvils ringing, machinery
humming, saws droning, and, near the great abattoir where cattle were
evidently slaughtered all day long, the piercing squeals of pigs in
their death throes. There was a busy market-place crowded from dawn
until noon with the good citizens of Perugia buying everything from
cabbages and dress-goods to picture post-cards and hardware. Long rows
of fat Perugian old ladies, sitting with baskets of wares in front
of them, all gossiped genially as they awaited purchasers. In the
public square facing the great hotels, nightly between seven and ten,
the whole spirited city seemed to be walking, a whole world of gay,
enthusiastic life that would remind you of an American manufacturing
town on a Saturday night--only this happens every night in Perugia.

When I arrived there I went directly to my hotel, which faces the
Piazza Vittorio Emanuele. It was excellent, charmingly built,
beautifully located, with a wide view of the Umbrian plain which is so
wonderful in its array of distant mountains and so rich in orchards,
monasteries, convents and churches. I think I never saw a place with
so much variety of scenery, such curious twists of streets and lanes,
such heights and depths of levels and platforms on which houses, the
five- and six-story tenement of the older order of life in Italy, are
built. The streets are all narrow, in some places not more than ten or
fifteen feet wide, arched completely over for considerable distances,
and twisting and turning, ascending or descending as they go, but they
give into such adorable squares and open places, such magnificent views
at every turn!

I do not know whether what I am going to say will have the force and
significance that I wish to convey, but a city like Perugia, taken as a
whole, all its gates, all its towers, all its upward-sweeping details,
is like a cathedral in itself, a Gothic cathedral. You would have to
think of the ridge on which it stands as providing the nave and the
transepts and the apse and then the quaint little winding streets of
the town itself with their climbing houses and towers would suggest the
pinnacles, spandrels, flying buttresses, airy statues and crosses of a
cathedral like Amiens. I know of no other simile that quite suggests
Perugia,--that is really so true to it.

No one save an historical zealot could extract much pleasure from the
complicated political and religious history of this city. However once
upon a time there was a guild of money-changers and bankers which
built a hall, called the Hall of the Cambio, which is very charming;
and at another time (or nearly the same time) there was a dominant
Guelph party which, in conjunction with some wealthy townsmen known
as the “Raspanti,” built what is now known as the Palazzo Publico or
Palazzo Communale, in what is now known as the Piazza del Municipio,
which I think is perfect. It is not a fortress like the Bargello or the
Palazzo Vecchio at Florence, but it is a perfect architectural thing,
the charm of which remains with me fresh and keen. It is a beautiful
structure--one that serves charmingly the uses to which it is put--that
of a public center for officials and a picture-gallery. It was in one
of these rooms, devoted to a collection of Umbrian art, that I found
a pretentious collection of the work of Perugino, the one really
important painter who ever lived or worked in Perugia--and the little
city now makes much of him.

If I felt like ignoring the long-winded art discussions of
comparatively trivial things, the charm and variety of the town and its
present-day life was in no wise lost upon me.

The unheralded things, the things which the guide-books do not talk
about, are sometimes so charming. I found it entrancing to descend of
a morning by lovely, cool, stone passages from the Piazza of Vittorio
Emanuele to the Piazza of the Army, and watch the soldiers, principally
cavalry, drill. Their ground was a space about five acres in extent, as
flat as a table, set high above the plain, with deep ravines descending
on either hand, and the quaint houses and public institutions of
Perugia looking down from above. To the left, as you looked out over
the plain, across the intervening ravine, was another spur of the
town, built also on a flat ridge with the graceful church of St. Peter
and its beautiful Italian-Gothic tower, and the whole road that swept
along the edge of the cliff, making a delightful way for carriages and
automobiles. I took delight in seeing how wonderfully the deep green
ravines separate one section of the town from another, and in watching
the soldiers, Italy then being at war with Tripoli.

You could stand, your arms resting upon some old brownish-green wall,
and look out over intervening fields to distant ranges of mountains,
or tower-like Assisi and Spoleto. The variety of the coloring of the
plain below was never wearying.

This Italian valley was so beautiful that I should like to say one more
word about the skies and the wonderful landscape effects. North of
here, in Florence, Venice and Milan, they do not occur so persistently
and with such glorious warmth at this season of the year. At this
height the nights were not cold, but cool, and the mornings burst with
such a blaze of color as to defy the art of all save the greatest
painters. They were not so much lurid as richly spiritualized, being
shot through with a strange electric radiance. This did not mean, as
it would so often in America, that a cloudy day was to follow. Rather
the radiance slowly gave place to a glittering field of light that
brought out every slope and olive orchard and distant cypress and
pine with amazing clearness. The bells of the churches in Perugia and
in the valley below were like muezzins calling to each other from
their praying-towers. As the day closed the features of the landscape
seemed to be set in crystal, and the greens and browns and grays to
have at times a metallic quality. Outside the walls in the distance
were churches, shrines, and monasteries, always with a cypress or two,
sometimes with many, which stood out with great distinctness, and from
distant hillsides you would hear laborers singing in the bright sun.
Well might they sing, for I know of no place where life would present
to them a fairer aspect.




CHAPTER XXXVII

THE MAKERS OF FLORENCE


With all the treasures of my historic reading in mind from the lives of
the Medici and Savonarola to that of Michelangelo and the Florentine
school of artists, I was keen to see what Florence would be like. Mrs.
Q. had described it as the most individual of all the Italian cities
that she had seen. She had raved over its narrow, dark, cornice-shaded
streets, its fortress-like palaces, its highly individual churches
and cloisters, the way the drivers of the little open vehicles plied
everywhere cracking their whips, until, she said, it sounded like
a Fourth of July in Janesville. I was keen to see how large the
dome of the cathedral would look and whether it would really tower
conspicuously over the remaining buildings of the city, and whether
the Arno would look as picturesque as it did in all the photographs.
The air was so soft and the sun so bright, although sinking low in the
west, as the train entered the city, that I was pleased to accept,
instead of the ancient atmosphere which I had anticipated, the wide
streets and rows of four- and six-family apartment houses which
characterize all the newer sections. They have the rich browns and
creams of the earlier portion of Florence; but they are very different
in their suggestion of modernity. The distant hills, as I could see
from the car windows, were dotted with houses and villas occupying
delightful positions above the town. Suddenly I saw the Duomo; and
although I knew it only from photographs I recognized it in an instant.
It spoke for itself in a large, dignified way. Over the housetops it
soared like a great bubble; and some pigeons flying in the air gave it
the last touch of beauty. We wound around the city in a circle--I could
tell this by the shifting position of the sun--through great yards of
railway-tracks with scores of engines and lines of small box-cars;
and then I saw a small stream and a bridge,--nothing like the Arno,
of course,--a canal; and the next thing we were rolling into a long
crowded railway-station, the guards calling Firenze. I got up, gathered
my overcoat and bags into my arms, signaled a _facino_ and gave them
to him; and then I sought a vehicle that would convey me to the hotel
for which I was bound--the Hotel de Ville on the Arno. I sat behind
a fat driver while he cracked his whip endlessly above the back of a
lazy horse, passing the while the showy façade of Santa Maria Novella,
striped with strange bands of white and bluish gray or drab,--a
pleasing effect for a church. I could see at once that the Florence of
the Middle Ages was a much more condensed affair than that which now
sprawls out in various directions from the Loggia dei Lanzi and the
place of the cathedral.

The narrow streets were alive with people; and the drivers of vehicles
everywhere seemed to drive as if their lives depended on it. Suddenly
we turned into a _piazza_ very modern and very different from that
of Santa Maria Novella; and then we were at the hotel door. It was a
nice-looking square, as I thought, not very large,--clean and gracious.
To my delight I found that my room opened directly upon a balcony which
overlooked the Arno, and that from it, sitting in a chair, I could
command all of that remarkable prospect of high-piled medieval houses
hanging over the water’s edge. It was beautiful. The angelus bells
were ringing; there was a bright glow in the west where the sun was
going down; the water of the stream was turquoise blue, and the walls
of all the houses seemingly brown. I stood and gazed, thinking of
the peculiarly efficient German manager I had encountered, the German
servants who were in charge of this hotel, and the fact that Florence
had long since radically changed from what it was. A German porter
came and brought my bags; a German maid brought hot water; a German
clerk took my full name and address for the register, and possibly for
the police; and then I was at liberty to unpack and dress for dinner.
Instead I took a stroll out along the stream-banks to study the world
of jewelry shops which I saw there, and the stands for flowers, and the
idling crowd.

I dare not imagine what the interest of Florence would be to any one
who did not know her strange and variegated history, but I should
think, outside of the surrounding scenic beauty, it would be little
or nothing. Unless one had a fondness for mere quaintness and gloom
and solidity, it would in a way be repulsive, or at best dreary. But
lighted by the romance, the tragedy, the lust, the zealotry, the
brutality and the artistic idealism that surrounds such figures as
Dante, the Medici, Savonarola, Donatello, Michelangelo, Brunelleschi,
and the whole world of art, politics, trade, war, it takes on a strange
luster to me, that of midnight waters lighted by the fitful gleams of
distant fires. I never think of it without seeing in my mind’s eye
the Piazza della Signoria as it must have looked on that day in 1494
when that famous fiasco, in regard to “the test by fire,” entered
into between Savonarola and the Franciscan monks, took place,--those
long, ridiculous processions of Dominicans and Franciscans, Savonarola
bearing the chalice aloft; or that other day when Charles VIII of
France at the instance of Savonarola paraded the street in black
helmet with mantle of gold brocade, his lance leveled before him,
his retainers gathered about him, and then disappointed the people
by getting off his horse and showing himself to be the insignificant
little man that he was, almost deformed and with an idiotic expression
of countenance. Neither can I forget the day that Savonarola was
beheaded and burnt for his religious zealotry in this same Piazza della
Signoria; nor all the rivals of the Medici hung from the windows of
the Palazzo Vecchio or beheaded in the Bargello. Think of the tonsured
friars and grave citizens of this medieval city, under Savonarola’s
fiery incitement, their heads garlanded with flowers, mingling with the
overwrought children called to help in purifying the city, dancing like
David before the ark and shouting “Long live Christ and the Virgin,
our rulers”; of the days when Alessandro Medici and his boon companion
and cousin, Lorenzo, rode about the city on a mule together, defiling
the virtue of innocent girls, roistering in houses of ill repute,
and drinking and stabbing to their hearts’ content; of Fra Girolamo
preaching to excited crowds in the Duomo and of his vision of a black
cross over Rome, a red one over Jerusalem; of Machiavelli writing his
brochure “The Prince”; and of Michelangelo defending the city walls
as an engineer. Can any other city match this spectacular, artistic,
melodramatic progress in so short a space of time, or present the
galaxy of artists, the rank company of material masters such as the
Medici, the Pazzi, the Strozzi, plotting and counter-plotting to the
accompaniment of lusts and murders? Other cities have had their amazing
hours, all of them, from Rome to London. But Florence! It has always
seemed to me that the literary possibilities of Florence, in spite of
the vast body of literature concerning it, have scarcely been touched.

The art section alone is so vast and so brilliant that one of the art
merchants told me while I was there that at least forty thousand of
the city’s one hundred and seventy thousand population is foreign
(principally English and American), drawn to it by its art merits, and
that the tide of travel from April to October is amazing. I can believe
it. You will hear German and English freely spoken in all the principal
thoroughfares.

Because of a gray day and dull, following the warmth and color and
light of Perugia and Rome, Florence seemed especially dark and somber
to me at first; but I recovered. Its charm and beauty grew on me by
degrees so that by the time I had done inspecting Santa Maria Novella,
Santa Croce, San Marco, the Cathedral group and the Bargello, I was
really desperately in love with the art of it all, and after I had
investigated the galleries, the Pitti, Uffizi, Belle Arti, and the
Cloisters, I was satisfied that I could find it in my heart to live
here and work, a feeling I had in many other places in Europe.

Truly, however, there is no other city in Europe just like Florence;
it has all the distinction of great individuality. My mood changed
about, at times, as I thought of the different periods of its history,
the splendor of its ambitions or the brutality of its methods; but
when I was in the presence of some of its perfect works of art, such
as Botticelli’s “Spring” in the Belle Arti, or Michelangelo’s “Tombs
of the Medici” in San Lorenzo, or Titian’s “Magdalen,” or Raphael’s
“Leo X” in the Pitti, or Benozzo Gozzoli’s fresco (the journey of the
three kings to Bethlehem) in the old Medici Palace, then I was ready to
believe that nothing could be finer than Florence. I realized now that
of all the cities in Europe that I saw Florence was possessed of the
most intense art atmosphere,--something that creeps over your soul in a
grim realistic way and causes you to repeat over and over: “Amazing men
worked here--amazing men!”

It was so strange to find driven home to me,--even more here than in
Rome, that illimitable gulf that divides ideality of thought and
illusion from reality. Men painted the illusions of Christianity
concerning the saints and the miracles at this time better than ever
before or since, and they believed something else. A Cosimo Medici who
could patronize the Papacy with one hand and make a cardinal into a
pope, could murder a rival with the other; and Andrea del Castagno,
who was seeking to shine as a painter of religious art--madonnas,
transfigurations, and the like--could murder a Domenico Veneziano in
order to have no rival in what he considered to be a permanent secret
of how to paint in oils. The same munificence that could commission
Michelangelo to design and execute a magnificent façade for San Lorenzo
(it was never done, of course) could suborn the elective franchise of
the people and organize a school on the lines of Plato’s Academy. In
other words, in Florence as in the Court of Alexander VI at Rome, we
find life stripped of all sham in action, in so far as an individual
and his conscience were concerned, and filled with the utmost subtlety
in so far as the individual and the public were concerned. Cosimo and
Lorenzo de’ Medici, Andrea del Castagno, Machiavelli, the Pazzi, the
Strozzi,--in fact, the whole “kit and kaboodle” of the individuals
comprising the illustrious life that foregathered here, were cut
from the same piece of cloth. They were, one and all, as we know,
outside of a few artistic figures, shrewd, calculating, relentless and
ruthless seekers after power and position; lust, murder, gormandizing,
panoplizing, were the order of the day. Religion,--it was to be laughed
at; weakness,--it was to be scorned. Poverty was to be misused.
Innocence was to be seized upon and converted. Laughing at virtue and
satisfying themselves always, they went their way, building their
grim, dark, almost windowless palaces; preparing their dungeons and
erecting their gibbets for their enemies. No wonder Savonarola saw
“a black cross over Rome.” They struck swiftly and surely and smiled
blandly and apparently mercifully; they had the Asiatic notion of
morality,--charity, virtue, and the like, combined with a ruthless
indifference to them. Power was the thing they craved--power and
magnificence; and these were the things they had. But, oh, Florence!
Florence! how you taught the nothingness of life itself; its shams;
its falsehoods; its atrocities; its uselessness. It has never been
any wonder to me that the saddest, darkest, most pathetic figure in
all art, Michelangelo Buonarroti, should have appeared and loved
and dreamed and labored and died at this time. His melancholy was a
fit commentary on his age, on life, and on all art. Oh, Buonarroti,
loneliest of figures: I think I understand how it was with you.

Bear with me while I lay a flower on this great grave. I cannot think
of another instance in art in which indomitable will and almost
superhuman energy have been at once so frustrated and so successful.

I never think of the great tomb for which the Moses in San Pietro in
Vincoli--large, grave, thoughtful; the man who could walk with God--and
the slaves in the Louvre were intended without being filled with a vast
astonishment and grief to think that life should not have permitted
this design to come to fulfilment. To think that a pope so powerful as
Julius should have planned a tomb so magnificent, with Michelangelo
to scheme it out and actually to begin it, and then never permit it
to reach completion. All the way northward through Italy this idea of
a parallelogram with forty figures on it and covered with reliefs and
other ornaments haunted me. At Florence, in the Belle Arti, I saw more
of the figures (casts), designed for this tomb--strange, unfolding
thoughts half-hewn out of the rock, which suggest the source from
which Rodin has drawn his inspiration,--and my astonishment grew.
Before I was out of Italy, this man and his genius, the mere dreams
of the things he hoped to do, enthralled me so that to me he has
become the one great art figure of the world. Colossal is the word for
Michelangelo,--so vast that life was too short for him to suggest even
a tithe of what he felt. But even the things that he did, how truly
monumental they are.

I am sure I am not mistaken when I say that there is a profound
sadness, too, running through all that he ever did. His works are
large, Gargantuan, and profoundly melancholy; witness the Moses that
I have been talking of, to say nothing of the statues on the tombs of
the Medici in San Lorenzo at Florence. I saw them in Berlin, reproduced
there in plaster in the Kaiser-Friederich-Museum, and once more I was
filled with the same sense of profound, meditative melancholy. It is
present in its most significant form here in Florence, in San Lorenzo,
the façade of which he once prepared to make magnificent, but here he
was again frustrated. I saw the originals of these deep, sad figures
that impressed me as no other sculptural figures ever have done.
“Dawn and Dusk”; “Day and Night.” How they dwell with me constantly.
I was never able to look at any of his later work--the Sistine Chapel
frescoes, the figures of slaves in the Louvre, the Moses in San Pietro
in Vincoli, or these figures here in Florence, without thinking how
true it was that this great will had rarely had its way and how,
throughout all his days, his energy was so unfortunately compelled to
war with circumstance. Life plays this trick on the truly great if they
are not ruthless and of material and executive leanings. Art is a pale
flower that blooms only in sheltered places and to drag it forth and
force it to contend with the rough usages of the world is to destroy
its perfectness. It was so in this man’s case who at times, because of
unlucky conjunctions, was compelled to fly for his life, or to sue for
the means which life should have been honored to bestow upon him, or
else to abandon great purposes.

Out of such a mist of sorrow, and only so, however, have come these
figures that now dream here year after year in their gray chapel, while
travelers come and go, draining their cup of wonder,--rising ever and
anon to the level of the beauty they contemplate. I can see Browning
speculating upon the spirit of these figures. “Night” with her heavy
lids, lost in great weariness; and “Day” with his clear eyes. I can see
Rodin gathering substance for his “Thinker,” and Shelley marveling at
the suggestions which arise from these mighty figures. There is none so
great as this man who, in his medieval gloom and mysticism, inherited
the art of Greece.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

A NIGHT RAMBLE IN FLORENCE


Whatever the medieval atmosphere of Florence may have been, and when I
was there the exterior appearance of the central heart was obviously
somewhat akin to its fourteenth- and fifteenth-century predecessor,
to-day its prevailing spirit is thoroughly modern. If you walk in the
Piazza della Signoria or the Piazza del Duomo or the Via dei Calzaioli,
the principal thoroughfare, you will encounter most of the ancient
landmarks--a goodly number of them, but they will look out of place, as
in the case of the palaces with their windowless ground floors, built
so for purposes of defense, their corner lanterns, barricaded windows,
and single great entrances easily guarded. To-day these regions have,
if not the open spacing of the modern city, at least the commercial
sprightliness and matter-of-fact business display and energy which is
characteristic of commerce everywhere.

I came to the Piazza della Signoria, the most famous square of the
city, quite by accident, the first night following a dark, heavily
corniced street from my hotel and at once recognized the Palazzo
Vecchio, with its thin angular tower; the Loggia dei Lanzi, where
in older times public performances were given in the open; and the
equestrian statue of Cosimo I. I idled long here, examining the
bronze slab which marks the site of the stake at which Savonarola
and two other Dominicans were burned in 1498, the fountain designed
by Bartolommeo Ammanati; the two lions at the step of the Loggia and
Benvenuto Cellini’s statue of “Perseus” with the head of Medusa. A
strange genius, that. This figure is as brilliant and thrilling as it
is ghastly.

It was a lovely night. The moon came up after a time as it had at
Perugia and Assisi and I wandered about these old streets, feeling
the rough brown walls, looking in at the open shop windows, most
of them dark and lighted by street lamps, and studying always the
wide, overhanging cornices. All really interesting cities are so
delightfully different. London was so low, gray, foggy, heavy, drab,
and commonplace; Paris was so smart, swift, wide-spaced, rococo,
ultra-artistic, and fashionable; Monte Carlo was so semi-Parisian
and semi-Algerian or Moorish, with sunlight and palms; Rome was so
higgledy-piggledy, of various periods, with a strange mingling of
modernity and antiquity, and over all blazing sunlight and throughout
all cypresses; and now in Florence I found the compact, dark
atmosphere, suggestive of what Paris once was, centuries before, with
this distinctive feature, that the wide cornice is here an essential
characteristic. It is so wide! It protrudes outward from the building
line at least three or four feet and it may be much more, six or
seven. One thing is certain, as I found to my utter delight on a
rainy afternoon, you can take shelter under its wide reach and keep
comparatively dry. Great art has been developed in making it truly
ornamental and it gives the long narrow streets a most individual and,
in my judgment, distinguished appearance.

It was quite by accident, also, on this same evening that I came
upon the Piazza del Duomo where the street cars are. I did not know
where I was going until suddenly turning a corner there I saw it--the
Campanile at last and a portion of the Cathedral standing out soft
and fair in the moonlight! I shall always be glad that I saw it so,
for the strange stripe and arabesque of its stone work,--slabs of
white or cream-colored stone interwoven in lovely designs with slabs
of slate-colored granite, had an almost eerie effect. It might have
been something borrowed from Morocco or Arabia or the Far East.
The dome, too, as I drew nearer, and the Baptistery soared upwards
in a magnificent way and, although afterwards I was sorry that
the municipality has never had sense enough to tear out the ruck
of buildings surrounding it and leave these three monuments--the
Cathedral, the Campanile, and the Baptistery--standing free and clear,
as at Pisa, on a great stone platform or square,--nevertheless, cramped
as I think they are, they are surely beautiful.

I was not so much impressed by the interior of the cathedral. Its
beauty is largely on the outside.

I ascended the Campanile still another day and from its height viewed
all Florence, the windings of the Arno, San Miniato, Fiesole, but,
try as I might, I could not think of it in modern terms. It was
too reminiscent of the Italy of the Medici, of the Borgias, Julius
II, Michelangelo and all the glittering company who were their
contemporaries. One thing that was strongly impressed upon me there
was that every city should have a great cathedral. Not so much as a
symbol or theory of religion as an object of art, something which would
indicate the perfection of the religious ideal taken from an artistic
point of view. Here you can stand and admire the exquisite double
windows with twisted columns, the infinite variety of the inlaid marble
work, and the quaint architecture of the niches supported by columns.
It was after midnight and the moon was high in the heavens shining down
with a rich springlike effect before I finally returned from the Duomo
Square, following the banks of the Arno and admiring the shadows cast
by the cornices and so finally reached my hotel and my bed.

The Uffizi and Pitti collections of paintings are absolutely the most
amazing I saw abroad. There are other wonderful collections, the
Louvre being absolutely unbelievable for size; but here the art is so
uniformly relative to Italy, so identified with the Renaissance, so
suggestive of the influence and the patronage which gave it birth. The
influence of religion, the wealth of the Catholic Church, the power
of individual families such as the Medici and the Dukes of Venice are
all clearly indicated. Botticelli’s “Adoration of the Magi” in the
Uffizi, showing the proud Medici children, the head of Cosimo Pater
Patriae, and the company of men of letters and statesmen of the time,
all worked in as figures about the Christ child, tell the whole story.
Art was flattering to the nobility of the day. It was dependent for its
place and position upon religion, upon the patronage of the Church,
and so you have endless “Annunciations,” “Adorations,” “Flights into
Egypt,” “Crucifixions,” “Descents from the Cross,” “Entombments,”
“Resurrections,” and the like. The sensuous “Magdalena,” painted for
her form and the beauty of suggestion, you will encounter over and over
again. All the saints in the calendar, the proud Popes and Cardinals
of a dozen families, the several members of the Medici family--they
are all there. Now and then you will encounter a Rubens, a Van Dyck,
a Rembrandt, or a Frans Hals from the Netherlands, but they are rare.
Florence, Rome, Venice, Pisa, and Milan, are best represented by their
own sculptors, painters and architects and it is the local men largely
in whom you rejoice. The bits from other lands are few and far between.

Rome for sculptures, frescoes, jewel-box churches, ancient ruins, but
Florence for paintings and the best collections of medieval artistic
craftsmanship.

In the Uffizi, the Pitti, and the Belle Arti I browsed among the vast
collections of paintings sharpening my understanding of the growth of
Italian art. I never knew until I reached Florence how easy it is to
trace the rise of Christian art, to see how one painter influenced
another, how one school borrowed from another. It is all very plain.
If by the least effort you fix the representatives of the different
Italian schools in mind, you can judge for yourself.

I returned three times to look at Botticelli’s “Spring” in the Belle
Arti, that marvelous picture which I think in many respects is the
loveliest picture in the world, so delicate, so poetically composed,
so utterly suggestive of the art and refinement of the painter and of
life at its best. The “Three Graces,” so lightly clad in transparent
raiment, are so much the soul of joy and freshness, the utter
significance of spring. The ruder figures to the left do so portray
the cold and blue of March, the warmer April, and the flower-clad May!
I could never tire of the artistry which could have March blowing on
April’s mouth from which flowers fall into the lap of May. Nor could
I weary of the spirit that could select green, sprouting things for
the hem of April’s garment; or above Spring’s head place a wingèd
and blindfolded baby shooting a fiery arrow at the Three Graces. To
me Botticelli is the nearest return to the Greek spirit of beauty,
grace and lightness of soul, combined with later delicacy and romance
that the modern world has known. It is so beautiful that for me it is
sad--full of the sadness that only perfect beauty can inspire.

[Illustration: I sated myself on the house fronts or backs below the
Ponte Vecchio]

I think now, of all the places I saw in Italy, perhaps Florence really
preserves in spite of its changes most of the atmosphere of the past,
but that is surely not for long, either; for it is growing and the
Germans are arriving. They were in complete charge of my hotel here and
of other places, as I shortly saw, and I fancy that the future of
northern Italy is to be in the hands of the Germans.

As I walked about this city, lingering in its doorways, brooding over
its pictures, reconstructing for myself the life of the Middle Ages, I
could not help thinking how soon it must all go. No doubt the churches,
palaces, and museums will be retained in their present form for
hundreds of years, and they should be, but soon will come wider streets
and newer houses even in the older section (the heart of the city) and
then farewell to the medieval atmosphere. In all likelihood the wide
cornices, now such a noticeable feature of the city, will be abandoned
and then there will be scarcely anything to indicate the Florence of
the past. Already the street cars were clang-clanging their way through
certain sections.

The Arno here is so different from the Tiber at Rome; and yet so much
like it, for it has in the main the same unprepossessing look, running
as it does through the city between solid walls of stone but lacking
the spectacles of the castle of St. Angelo, Saint Peter’s, the hills
and the gardens of the Aventine and the Janiculum. There are no ancient
ruins on the Arno,--only the suggestive architecture of the Middle
Ages, the wonderful Ponte Vecchio and the houses adjacent to it.

Indeed the river here is nothing more than a dammed stream--shallow
before it reaches the city, shallow after it leaves it, but held in
check here by great stone dams which give it a peculiarly still mass
and depth. The spirit of the people was not the same as that of those
in Rome or other cities; the spirit of the crowd was different. A
darker, richer, more phlegmatic populace, I thought. The people were
slow, leisurely, short and comfortable. I sated myself on the house
fronts or backs below the Ponte Vecchio and on the little jewelry shops
of which there seemed to be an endless variety; and then feeling that
I had had a taste of the city, I returned to larger things. The Duomo,
the palaces of the Medici, the Pitti Palace, and that world which
concerned the Council of Florence, and the dignified goings to and fro
of old Cosimo Pater and his descendants were the things that I wished
to see and realize for myself if I could.

I think we make a mistake when we assume that the manners, customs,
details, conversation, interests and excitements of people anywhere
were ever very much different from what they are now. In three or four
hundred years from now people in quite similar situations to our own
will be wondering how we took our daily lives; quite the same as our
ancestors, I should say, and no differently from our descendants. Life
works about the same in all times. Only exterior aspects change. In the
particular period in which Florence, and all Italy for that matter, was
so remarkable, Italy was alive with ambitious men--strong, remarkable,
capable characters. _They_ made the wonder of the life, it was not the
architecture that did it and not the routine movements of the people.
Florence has much the same architecture to-day, better in fact; but not
the men. Great men make great times--and only struggling, ambitious,
vainglorious men make the existence of the artist possible, however
much he may despise them. They are the only ones who in their vainglory
and power can readily call upon him to do great things and supply the
means. Witness Raphael and Michelangelo in Italy, Rubens in Holland,
and Velasquez in Spain.




CHAPTER XXXIX

FLORENCE OF TO-DAY


It was while I was in Florence that a light was thrown on an industry
of which I had previously known little and which impressed me much.

Brooding over the almost endless treasures of the city, I ambled into
the Strozzi Palace one afternoon, that perfect example of Florentine
palatial architecture, then occupied by an exposition of objects of
art, reproductions and originals purporting to be the work of an
association of Italian artists. After I had seen, cursorily, most of
the treasures in the Palazzo Strozzi, I encountered a thing which I had
long heard of but never seen,--an organization for the reproduction,
the reduplication, of all the wonders of art, and cheaply, too. The
place was full of marbles of the loveliest character, replicas of
famous statues in the Vatican, the Louvre, the Uffizi, and elsewhere;
and in many instances, also, copies of the great pictures. There was
beautiful furniture imitated, even as to age, from many of the Italian
palaces, the Riccardi, Albizzi, Pazzi, Pitti, Strozzi, and others;
and as for garden-fittings--fountains, fauns, cupids, benches, metal
gateways, pergolas, and the like, they were all present. They were
marvelous reproductions from some of the villas, with the patina of age
upon them, and I thought at first that they were original. I was soon
undeceived, for I had not been there long, strolling about, when an
attendant brought and introduced to me a certain Prof. Ernesto Jesuram,
a small, dark, wiry man with clear, black, crowlike eyes who made clear
the whole situation.

The markets of the world, according to Mr. Jesuram, a Jew, were being
flooded with cheap imitations of every truly worthy object of art,
from Italian stone benches to landscapes by Corot or portraits by
Frans Hals--masquerading as originals; and it had been resolved by
this Association of Italian Artists that this was unfair, not only to
the buyer and the art-loving public generally, but also to the honest
craftsman who could make an excellent living reproducing, frankly,
copies of ancient works of merit at a nominal price, if only they
were permitted to copy them. Most, in fact all of them, could make
interesting originals but in many cases they would lack that trait of
personality which makes all the difference between success and failure;
whereas they could perfectly reproduce the masterpieces of others and
that, too, for prices with which no foreigner could compete. So they
had banded themselves together, determined to do better work, and sell
more cheaply than the fly-by-night rascals who were confounding and
degrading all good art and to say frankly to each and all: “Here is a
perfect reproduction of a very lovely thing. Do you want it at a very
low cost?” or, “We will make for you an exact copy of anything that you
see and admire and wish to have and we will make it so cheaply that you
cannot afford to dicker with doubtful dealers who sell you imitations
_as originals_ and charge you outrageous prices.”

I have knocked about sufficiently in my time in the showy chambers of
American dealers and elsewhere to know that there is entirely too much
in what was told me.

The wonder of Florence grew a little under the Professor’s quiet
commercial analysis, for after exhausting this matter of reproducing so
cheaply, we proceeded to a discussion of the present conditions of the
city.

“It’s very different commercially from anything in America or the
north of Europe,” he said, “or even the north of Italy, for as yet we
have scarcely anything in the way of commerce here. We still build in
the fashion they used five hundred years ago--narrow streets and big
cornices in order to keep up the atmosphere of the city, for we are
not strong enough commercially yet to go it alone, and besides I don’t
think the Italians will ever be different. They are an easy-going
race. They don’t need the American “two dollars a day” to live on.
Fifty centimes will do. For one thousand dollars (five thousand lire)
you can rent a palace here for a year and I can show you whole floors
overlooking gardens that you can rent for seventeen dollars a month. We
have a garden farther out that we use as a workshop here in Florence,
in the heart of the city, which we rent for four hundred dollars a
year.”

“What about the Italian’s idea of progress? Isn’t he naturally
constructive?” I asked Mr. Jesuram.

“Rarely the Italian. Not at this date. We have many Jews and
Germans here who are doing well, and foreign capital is building
street-railways. I think the Italians will have to be fused with
another nation to experience a new birth. The Germans are mixing with
them. If they ever get as far south as Sicily, Italy will be made over;
the Germans themselves will be made over. I notice that the Italians
and Germans get along well together.”

I thought of the age-long wars between the Teutons and the Italians
from the fifth to the twelfth century, but those days are over. They
can apparently mingle in peace now, as I saw here and farther north.

It was also while I was in Florence that I first became definitely and
in an irritated way conscious of a certain aspect of travel which no
doubt thousands of other travelers have noted for themselves but of
which, nevertheless, I feel called upon to speak.

I could never come in to the breakfast table either there, or at Rome,
or in Venice, or Milan, without encountering a large company of that
peculiarly American brand of sightseers, not enormously rich, of no
great dignity, but comfortable and above all enormously pleased with
themselves. I could never look at any of this tribe, comfortably
clothed, very pursy and fussy, without thinking what a far cry it
is from the temperament which makes for art or great originality
to the temperament which makes for normality--the great, so-called
sane, conservative mass. God spare me! I’ll admit that for general
purposes, the value of breeding, trading, rearing of children in
comfort, producing the living atmosphere of life in which we “find”
ourselves and from which art, by the grace of great public occasions
may rise, people of this type are essential. But seen individually,
dissociated from great background masses, they are--but let me not go
wild. Viewed from the artistic angle, the stress of great occasions,
great emotion, great necessities, they fall into such pigmy weaknesses,
almost ridiculous. Here abroad they come so regularly, Pa and Ma. Pa
infrequently, and a little vague-looking from overwork and limited
vision of soul; Ma not infrequently, a little superior, vain, stuffy,
envious, dull and hard. I never see such a woman as that but my gorge
rises a little. The one idea of a pair like this, particularly of the
mother, is the getting her children (if there be any) properly married,
the girls particularly, and in this phase of family politics Pa has
obviously little to say. Their appearance abroad, accompanied by Henry
and George, Junior, and Mary and Anabel, is for--I scarcely know what.
It is so plain on the face of it that no single one of them has the
least inkling of what he is seeing. I sat in a carriage with two of
them in Rome, viewing the ruins of the Via Appia, and when we reached
the tomb of Cæcilia Metella I heard:

“Oh, yes. There it is. What was _she_, anyhow? He was a Roman general,
I think, and _she_ was his wife. His house was next door and he built
this tomb here so she would be near him. Isn’t it wonderful? Such a
nice idea!”

So far as I could make out from watching this throng the principal idea
was to be able to say that they had been abroad. Poor old Florence! Its
beauty and its social significance passed unrecognized. Art, so far
as I could judge from the really unmoved spectators present, was for
crazy people. The artist was some weird, spindling, unfortunate fool,
a little daft perhaps, but tolerable for a strange furore he seemed to
have created. Great men made and used him. He was, after his fashion,
a servant. The objectionable feature of a picture like Botticelli’s
“Spring” would be the nudity of the figures! From a Rubens or a nude
Raphael we lead brash, unctuous, self-conscious Mary away in silence.
If we encounter, perchance, quite unexpectedly a “Leda” by Michelangelo
or a too nude “Assumption” by Bronzino, we turn away in disgust. Art
must be limited to conventional theories and when so limited is not
worth much anyhow.

It was amazing to see them strutting in and out, their good clothes
rustling, an automobile in waiting, noisily puffing the while they
gather aimless “impressions” wherewith to browbeat their neighbors.
George and Henry and Mary and Anabel, protesting half the time or in
open rebellion, are duly led to see the things which have been the most
enthusiastically recommended, be they palaces or restaurants.

I often wondered what it was--the best--which these people got out
of their trip abroad. The heavy Germans I saw I always suspected of
having solid Teutonic understanding and appreciation of everything;
the English were uniformly polite, reserved, intelligent, apparently
discriminating. But these Americans! If you told them the true story
of Antinous, whose head I saw them occasionally admiring; or forced
upon them the true details of the Borgias, the Sforzas, the Medici,
or even the historical development of Art, they would fly in horror.
They have no room in their little crania for anything save their own
notions,--the standards of the Methodist Church at Keokuk. I think,
sometimes, perhaps it is because we are all growing to a different
standard, trying to make life something different from what it has
always been, or appeared to be, that all the trouble comes about. Time
will remedy that. Life,--its heavy, interminable processes,--will
break any theory. I conceive of life as a blind goddess, pouring from
separate jars, one of which she holds in each hand, simultaneously, the
streams of good and evil, which mingling, make this troubled existence,
flowing ever onward to the sea.

It was also while I was at Florence that I finally decided to change
my plan and visit Venice. “It is a city without a disappointment,” a
publisher-friend of mine had one time assured me, with the greatest
confidence. And so, here at Florence, on this first morning, I altered
my plans; I changed my ticket at Thomas Cook’s and crowded Venice in
between Florence and Milan. I gave myself a stay of four days, deciding
to lengthen it if I chose.

I really think that every traveler of to-day owes a debt of gratitude
to Thomas Cook & Sons. I never knew, until I went abroad what an
accommodation the offices of this concern are. Your mail is always
courteously received and cared for; your routes and tickets are changed
and altered at your slightest whim; your local bank is their cash-desk
and the only advisers you have, if you are alone and without the native
tongue at your convenience, are their clerks and agents at the train.
It does not make any difference to me that that is their business and
that they make a profit. In a foreign city where you are quite alone
you would grant them twice the profit for this courtesy. And it was
my experience, in the slight use I made of their service, that their
orders and letters of advice were carefully respected and that when you
came conducted by Thomas Cook, whether you took the best or the worst,
you were politely and assiduously looked after.

One of the most amusing letters that I received while abroad was from
this same publisher-friend who wanted me to go to Venice. Not so long
before I left Rome, he had arrived with his wife, daughter, and a
young girl friend of his daughter whose first trip abroad they were
sponsoring. At a luncheon they had given me, the matter of seeing the
Pope had come up and I mentioned that I had been so fortunate as to
find some one who could introduce me, and that it was just possible,
if they wished it, that my friend would extend his courtesy to them.
The young girls in particular were eager, but I was not sure. I left
Rome immediately afterward, writing to my British correspondent,
bespeaking his interest in their behalf, and at the same time to my
publisher-friend that I was doing so. As an analysis of girlhood
vagaries, keen and clever, read his letter:

    _My Dear Dreiser_:

    The young woman who thinks she wants to see the Pope goes under
    the name of Margaret,--but I wouldn’t try very hard to bring it
    about, because if Margaret went, my daughter would want to go,
    and if Margaret and my daughter went, my wife would feel out in
    the cold. (The old man can stand it.)

    Margaret’s motives are simply childish curiosity, possibly
    combined with a slight desire to give pleasure to the Holy
    Father.

    But don’t try to get that Papal interview for Margaret unless
    you can get it for all the ladies. You will introduce a serpent
    into my paradise.

No serpent was introduced because I couldn’t get the interview.

And the cells and cloister of San Marco,--shall I ever forget them?
I went there on a spring morning (spring in Italy) when the gleaming
light outside filled the cloister with a cool brightness, and studied
the frescoes of Fra Angelico and loitered between the columns of the
arches in the cloister proper, meditating upon the beauty of the things
here gathered. Really, Italy is too beautiful. One should be a poet
in soul, insatiable as to art, and he should linger here forever.
Each poorest cell here has a small fresco by Fra Angelico, and the
refectory, the chapter house, and the foresteria are filled with large
compositions, all rich in that symbolism which is only wonderful
because of the art-feeling of the master. I lingered in the cells,
the small chambers once occupied by Savonarola, and meditated on the
great zealot’s imaginings. In a way his dream of the destruction of the
Papacy came true. Even as he preached, the Reformation was at hand,
only he did not know it. Martin Luther was coming. The black cross was
over Rome! And also true was his thought that the end of the old order
in Italy had come. It surely had. Never afterwards was it quite the
same and never would it be so again. And equally true was his vision
of the red cross over Jerusalem, for never was the simple humanism of
Jesus so firmly based in the minds of men as it is to-day, though all
creeds and religious theories totter wearily to their ruin. Savonarola
was destroyed, but not his visions or his pleas. They are as fresh and
powerful to-day, as magnetic and gripping, as are any that have been
made in history.

It was the same with the Bargello, the tombs of the Medici, San Miniato
and the basilica and monastery at Fiesole. That last, with the wind
singing in the cypresses, a faint mist blowing down the valley of the
Arno, all Florence lying below and the lights of evening beginning
to appear, stands fixed and clear in my mind. I saw it for the last
time the evening before I left. I sat on a stone bench overlooking a
wonderful prospect, rejoicing in the artistic spirit of Italy which
has kept fresh and clean these wonders of art, when I was approached
by a brown Dominican, his feet and head bare, his body stout and
comfortable. He asked for alms! I gave him a lira for the sake of
Savonarola who belonged to his order and--because of the spirit of
Italy, that in the midst of a changing, commercializing world still
ministers to these shrines of beauty and keeps them intact and
altogether lovely.

One last word and I am done. I strolled out from Santa Croce one
evening a little confused by the charm of all I had seen and wondering
how I could best bestow my time for the remaining hours of light. I
tried first to find the house of Michelangelo which I fancied was
somewhere in the vicinity, but not finding it, came finally to the
Arno which I followed upstream. The evening was very pleasant, quite
a sense of spring in the air and of new-made gardens, and I overcame
my disappointment at having failed to accomplish my original plan. I
passed new streets, wider than the old ones in the heart of the city,
with street lamps, arc-lights, modern awnings and a trolley-car running
in the distance. Presently I came to a portion of the Arno lovelier
than any I had yet seen. Of course the walls through which it flows in
the city had disappeared and in their place came grass-covered banks
with those tall thin poplars I had so much admired in France. The
waters were a “Nile green” at this hour and the houses, collected in
small groups, were brown, yellow, or white, with red or brown roofs and
brown or green shutters. The old idea of arches with columns and large
projecting roofs still persisted in these newer, outlying houses and
made me wonder whether Florence might not, after all, always keep this
characteristic.

As I went farther out the houses grew less frequent and lovely
bluish-black hills appeared. There was a smoke-stack in the distance,
just to show that Florence was not dead to the idea of manufacturing,
and beyond in a somewhat different direction the dome of the
cathedral,--that really impressive dome.

Some men were fishing in the stream from the bank, apparently catching
nothing. I noticed the lovely cypresses of the South in the distance,
the large villas on the hills, and here and there clumps of those tall,
slender trees of France, not conspicuous elsewhere on my journey.

In one place I noticed the largest display of washing I have ever seen,
quite the largest,--a whole field of linen, no less, hung out to dry;
and in another place some slow-moving men cutting wood.

It was very warm, very pleasant, slightly suggestive of rain, with
the smoke going up straight, and after a while when the evening
church-bells were beginning to ring, calling to each other from vale
and hill, my sense of springtime and pleasant rural and suburban
sweetness was complete.

Laughter carried I noticed, in some peculiar, echoing way. The music of
the bells was essentially quieting. I had no sense of Florence, old
or new, but just spring, hope, new birth. And as I turned back after
a time I knew I had acquired a different and very precious memory of
Florence--something that would last me years and years. I should always
think of the Arno as it looked this evening--how safe and gracious and
still. I should always hear the voices in laughter, and the bells; I
should always see the children playing on the green banks, quite as
I used to play on the Wabash and the Tippecanoe; and their voices in
Italian were no less sweet than our childish voices. I had a feeling
that somehow the spirit of Italy was like that of America, and that
somehow there is close kinship between us and Italy, and that it was
not for nothing that an Italian discovered America or that Americans,
of all people, have apparently loved Italy most and rivaled it most
closely in their periods of greatest achievement.




CHAPTER XL

MARIA BASTIDA


In studying out my itinerary at Florence I came upon the homely advice
in Baedeker that in Venice “care should be taken in embarking and
disembarking, especially when the tide is low, exposing the slimy
lower steps.” That, as much as anything I had ever read, visualized
this wonder city to me. These Italian cities, not being large, end
so quickly that before you can say Jack Robinson you are out of them
and away, far into the country. It was early evening as we pulled out
of Florence; and for a while the country was much the same as it had
been in the south--hill-towns, medieval bridges and strongholds, the
prevailing solid browns, pinks, grays and blues of the architecture,
the white oxen, pigs and shabby carts, but gradually, as we neared
Bologna, things seemed to take on a very modern air of factories, wide
streets, thoroughly modern suburbs and the like. It grew dark shortly
after that and the country was only favored by the rich radiance of the
moon which made it more picturesque and romantic, but less definite and
distinguishable.

In the compartment with me were two women, one a comfortable-looking
matron traveling from Florence to Bologna, the other a young girl of
twenty or twenty-one, of the large languorous type, and decidedly good
looking. She was very plainly dressed and evidently belonged to the
middle class.

The married Italian lady was small and good-looking and _bourgeoise_.
Considerably before dinner-time, and as we were nearing Bologna, she
opened a small basket which she carried and took from it a sandwich,
an apple, and a bit of cheese, which she ate placidly. For some reason
she occasionally smiled at me good-naturedly, but not speaking Italian,
I was without the means of making a single observation. At Bologna I
assisted her with her parcels and received a smiling backward glance
and then I settled myself in my seat wondering what the remainder of
the evening would bring forth. I was not so very long in discovering.

Once the married lady of Bologna had disappeared, my young
companion took on new life. She rose, smoothed down her dress and
reclined comfortably in her seat, her cheek laid close against the
velvet-covered arm, and looked at me occasionally out of half-closed
eyes. She finally tried to make herself more comfortable by lying down
and I offered her my fur overcoat as a pillow. She accepted it with a
half-smile.

About this time the dining-car steward came through to take a
memorandum of those who wished to reserve places for dinner. He looked
at the young lady but she shook her head negatively. I made a sudden
decision. “Reserve two places,” I said. The servitor bowed politely
and went away. I scarcely knew why I had said this, for I was under
the impression my young lady companion spoke only Italian, but I was
trusting much to my intuition at the moment.

A little later, when it was drawing near the meal time, I said, “Do you
speak English?”

“_Non_,” she replied, shaking her head.

“_Sprechen Sie Deutsch?_”

“_Ein wenig_,” she replied, with an easy, babyish, half-German,
half-Italian smile.

“_Sie sind doch Italianisch_,” I suggested.

“_Oh, oui!_” she replied, and put her head down comfortably on my coat.

“_Reisen Sie nach Venedig?_” I inquired.

“_Oui_,” she nodded. She half smiled again.

I had a real thrill of satisfaction out of all this, for although I
speak abominable German, just sufficient to make myself understood by
a really clever person, yet I knew, by the exercise of a little tact I
should have a companion to dinner.

“You will take dinner with me, won’t you?” I stammered in my best
German. “I do not understand German very well, but perhaps we can make
ourselves understood. I have two places.”

She hesitated, and said--“_Ich bin nicht hungerich._”

“But for company’s sake,” I replied.

“_Mais, oui_,” she replied indifferently.

I then asked her whether she was going to any particular hotel in
Venice--I was bound for the Royal Danieli--and she replied that her
home was in Venice.

Maria Bastida was a most interesting type. She was a Diana for size,
pallid, with a full rounded body. Her hair was almost flaxen and her
hands large but not unshapely. She seemed to be strangely world-weary
and yet strangely passionate--the kind of mind and body that does and
does not, care; a kind of dull, smoldering fire burning within her and
yet she seemed indifferent into the bargain. She asked me an occasional
question about New York as we dined, and though wine was proffered
she drank little and, true to her statement that she was not hungry,
ate little. She confided to me in soft, difficult German that she was
trying not to get too stout, that her mother was German and her father
Italian and that she had been visiting an uncle in Florence who was in
the grocery business. I wondered how she came to be traveling first
class.

The time passed. Dinner was over and in several hours more we would be
in Venice. We returned to our compartment and because the moon was
shining magnificently we stood in the corridor and watched its radiance
on clustered cypresses, villa-crowned hills, great stretches of flat
prairie or marsh land, all barren of trees, and occasionally on little
towns all white and brown, glistening in the clear light.

“It will be a fine night to see Venice for the first time,” I suggested.

“_Oh, oui! Herrlich! Prachtvoll!_” she replied in her queer mixture of
French and German.

I liked her command of sounding German words.

She told me the names of stations at which we stopped, and finally she
exclaimed quite gaily, “Now we are here! The Lagoon!”

I looked out and we were speeding over a wide body of water. It
was beautifully silvery and in the distance I could see the faint
outlines of a city. Very shortly we were in a car yard, as at Rome and
Florence, and then under a large train shed, and then, conveyed by an
enthusiastic Italian porter, we came out on the wide stone platform
that faces the Grand Canal. Before me were the white walls of marble
buildings and intervening in long, waving lines a great street of
water; the gondolas, black, shapely, a great company of them, nudging
each other on its rippling bosom, green-stained stone steps, sharply
illuminated by electric lights leading down to them, a great crowd of
gesticulating porters and passengers. I startled Maria by grabbing her
by the arm, exclaiming in German, “Wonderful! Wonderful!”

“_Est ist herrlich_” (It is splendid), she replied.

We stepped into a gondola, our bags being loaded in afterwards. It was
a singularly romantic situation, when you come to think of it: entering
Venice by moonlight and gliding off in a gondola in company with an
unknown and charming Italian girl who smiled and sighed by turns and
fairly glowed with delight and pride at my evident enslavement to the
beauty of it all.

She was directing the gondolier where to leave her when I exclaimed,
“Don’t leave me--please! Let’s do Venice together!”

She was not offended. She shook her head, a bit regretfully I like
to think, and smiled most charmingly. “Venice has gone to your head.
To-morrow you’ll forget me!”

And there my adventure ended!

It is a year, as I write, since I last saw the flaxen-haired Maria, and
I find she remains quite as firmly fixed in my memory as Venice itself,
which is perhaps as it should be.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the five or six days I spent in Venice--how they linger. How shall
one ever paint water and light and air in words. I had wild thoughts as
I went about of a splendid panegyric on Venice--a poem, no less--but
finally gave it up, contenting myself with humble notes made on the
spot which at some time I hoped to weave into something better. Here
they are--a portion of them--the task unfinished.

    What a city! To think that man driven by the hand of
    circumstance--the dread of destruction--should have sought out
    these mucky sea islands and eventually reared as splendid a
    thing as this. “The Veneti driven by the Lombards,” reads my
    Baedeker, “sought the marshy islands of the sea.” Even so. Then
    came hard toil, fishing, trading, the wonders of the wealth of
    the East. Then came the Doges, the cathedral, these splendid
    semi-Byzantine palaces. Then came the painters, religion,
    romance, history. To-day here it stands, a splendid shell,
    reminiscent of its former glory. Oh, Venice! Venice!

       *       *       *       *       *

    The Grand Canal under a glittering moon. The clocks striking
    twelve. A horde of black gondolas. Lovely cries. The rest is
    silence. Moon picking out the ripples in silver and black.
    Think of these old stone steps, white marble stained green,
    laved by the waters of the sea these hundreds of years. A long,
    narrow street of water. A silent boat passing. And this is a
    city of a hundred and sixty thousand!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Wonderful painted arch doorways and windows. Trefoil and
    quadrifoil decorations. An old iron gate with some statues
    behind it. A balcony with flowers. The Bridge of Sighs! Nothing
    could be so perfect as a city of water.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The Lagoon at midnight under a full moon. Now I think I know
    what Venice is at its best. Distant lights, distant voices.
    Some one singing. There are pianos in this sea-isle city,
    playing at midnight. Just now a man silhouetted blackly, under
    a dark arch. Our gondola takes us into the very hallway of the
    Royal-Danieli.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Water! Water! The music of all earthly elements. The lap of
    water! The sigh of water! The flow of water! In Venice you have
    it everywhere. It sings at the base of your doorstep; it purrs
    softly under your window; it suggests the eternal rhythm and
    the eternal flow at every angle. Time is running away; life
    is running away, and here in Venice, at every angle (under
    your window) is its symbol. I know of no city which at once
    suggests the lapse of time hourly, momentarily, and yet soothes
    the heart because of it. For all its movement or because of
    it, it is gay, light-hearted, without being enthusiastic. The
    peace that passes all understanding is here, soft, rhythmic,
    artistic. Venice is as gay as a song, as lovely as a jewel (an
    opal or an emerald), as rich as marble and as great as verse.
    There can only be one Venice in all the world!

       *       *       *       *       *

    No horses, no wagons, no clanging of cars. Just the patter of
    human feet. You listen here and the very language is musical.
    The voices are soft. Why should they be loud? They have nothing
    to contend with. I am wild about this place. There is a
    sweetness in the hush of things which woos, and yet it is not
    the hush of silence. All is life here, all movement--a sweet,
    musical gaiety. I wonder if murder and robbery can flourish
    in any of these sweet streets. The life here is like that of
    children playing. I swear in all my life I have never had such
    ravishing sensations of exquisite art-joy, of pure, delicious
    enthusiasm for the physical, exterior aspect of a city. It is
    as mild and sweet as moonlight itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

    This hotel, Royal Danieli, is a delicious old palace, laved
    on one side by a canal. My room commands the whole of the
    Lagoon. George Sand and Alfred de Musset occupied a room here
    somewhere. Perhaps I have it.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Venice is so markedly different from Florence. There all is
    heavy, somber, defensive, serious. Here all is light, airy,
    graceful, delicate. There could be no greater variation. Italy
    is such a wonderful country. It has Florence, Venice, Rome and
    Naples, to say nothing of Milan and the Riviera, which should
    really belong to it. No cornices here in Venice. They are all
    left behind in Florence.

       *       *       *       *       *

    What shall I say of St. Mark’s and the Ducal Palace--mosaics
    of history, utterly exquisite. The least fragment of St.
    Mark’s I consider of the utmost value. The Ducal Palace should
    be guarded as one of the great treasures of the world. It is
    perfect.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: There can only be one Venice]

    Fortunately I saw St. Mark’s in the morning, in clear,
    refreshing, springlike sunlight. Neither Venice nor Florence
    have the hard glitter of the South--only a rich brightness.
    The domes are almost gold in effect. The nine frescoes of
    the façade, gold, red and blue. The walls, cream and gray.
    Before it is the oblique quadrangle which necessitates your
    getting far to one side to see the church squarely--a perfect
    and magnificently individual jewel. All the great churches
    are that, I notice. Overhead a sky of blue. Before you a
    great, smooth pavement, crowded with people, the Campanile
    (just recompleted) soaring heavenward in perfect lines. What
    a square! What a treasure for a city to have! Momentarily
    this space is swept over by great clouds of pigeons. The new
    reproduction of the old Campanile glows with a radiance all
    its own. Above all, the gilded crosses of the church. To the
    right the lovely arcaded façade of the library. To the right
    of the church, facing the square, the fretted beauty of the
    Doge’s Palace--a portion of it. As I was admiring it a warship
    in the harbor fired a great gun--twelve o’clock. Up went all
    my pigeons, thousands it seemed, sweeping in great restless
    circles while church bells began to chime and whistles to blow.
    Where are the manufactories of Venice?

       *       *       *       *       *

    At first you do not realize it, but suddenly it occurs to
    you--a city of one hundred and sixty thousand without a wagon,
    or horse, without a long, wide street, anywhere, without
    trucks, funeral processions, street cars. All the shops doing a
    brisk business, citizens at work everywhere, material pouring
    in and out, but no wagons--only small barges and gondolas. No
    noise save the welcome clatter of human feet; no sights save
    those which have a strange, artistic pleasantness. You can hear
    people talking sociably, their voices echoed by the strange
    cool walls. You can hear birds singing high up in pretty
    windows where flowers trail downward; you can hear the soft lap
    of waters on old steps at times, the softest, sweetest music of
    all.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I find boxes, papers, straw, vegetable waste, all cast
    indifferently into the water and all borne swiftly out to
    sea. People open windows and cast out packages as if this
    were the only way. I walked into the Banca di Napoli this
    afternoon, facing the Grand Canal. It was only a few moments
    after the regular closing hour. I came upon it from some
    narrow lane--some “dry street.” It was quite open, the ground
    floor. There was a fine, dark-columned hall opening out upon
    the water. Where were the clerks, I wondered? There were none.
    Where that ultimate hurry and sense of life that characterizes
    the average bank at this hour? Nowhere. It was lovely, open,
    dark,--as silent as a ruin. When did the bank do business, I
    asked myself. No answer. I watched the waters from its steps
    and then went away.

       *       *       *       *       *

    One of the little tricks of the architects here is to place a
    dainty little Gothic balcony above a door, perhaps the only one
    on the façade, and that hung with vines.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Venice is mad about campaniles. It has a dozen, I think, some
    of them leaning, like the tower at Pisa.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I must not forget the old rose of the clouds in the west.

       *       *       *       *       *

    A gondolier selling vegetables and crying his wares is pure
    music. At my feet white steps laved by whitish-blue water.
    Tall, cool, damp walls, ten feet apart. Cool, wet, red brick
    pavements. The sun shining above makes one realize how lovely
    and cool it is here; and birds singing everywhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Gondolas doing everything, carrying casks, coal, lumber, lime,
    stone, flour, bricks, and boxed supplies generally, and others
    carrying vegetables, fruit, kindling and flowers. Only now I
    saw a boat slipping by crowded with red geraniums.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Lovely pointed windows and doors; houses, with colonnades,
    trefoils, quadrifoils, and exquisite fluted cornices to match,
    making every house that strictly adheres to them a jewel. It is
    Gothic, crossed with Moorish and Byzantine fancy. Some of them
    take on the black and white of London smoke, though why I have
    no idea. Others being colored richly at first are weathered by
    time into lovely half-colors or tones.

       *       *       *       *       *

    These little canals are heavenly! They wind like scattered
    ribbons, flung broadcast, and the wind touches them only in
    spots, making the faintest ripples. Mostly they are as still
    as death. They have exquisite bridges crossing in delightful
    arches and wonderful doors and steps open into them, steps gray
    or yellow or black with age, steps that have green and brown
    moss on them and that are alternately revealed or hidden by a
    high or low tide. Here comes a gondolier now, peddling oranges.
    The music of his voice!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Latticework is everywhere, and it so obviously _belongs_ here.
    Latticework in the churches, the houses, the public buildings.
    Venice loves it. It is oriental and truly beautiful.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I find myself at a branch station of the water street-car
    service. There are gondolas here, too,--a score for hire.
    This man hails me genially, his brown hands and face, and
    small, old, soft roll hat a picture in the sun. I feel as if
    I were dreaming or as if this were some exquisite holiday of
    my childhood. One could talk for years of these passages in
    which, amidst the shadow and sunlight of cool, gray walls a
    gleam of color has shown itself. You look down narrow courts
    to lovely windows or doors or bridges or niches with a virgin
    or a saint in them. Now it is a black-shawled housewife or a
    fat, phlegmatic man that turns a corner; now a girl in a white
    skirt and pale green shawl, or a red skirt and a black shawl.
    Unexpected doorways, dark and deep with pleasant industries
    going on inside, bakeries with a wealth of new, warm bread;
    butcheries with red meat and brass scales; small restaurants,
    where appetizing roasts and meat-pies are displayed. Unexpected
    bridges, unexpected squares, unexpected streams of people
    moving in the sun, unexpected terraces, unexpected boats,
    unexpected voices, unexpected songs. That is Venice.

       *       *       *       *       *

    To-day I took a boat on the Grand Canal to the Giardino which
    is at the eastern extreme of the city. It was evening. I found
    a lovely island just adjoining the gardens--a Piazza d’Arena.
    Rich green grass and a line of small trees along three sides.
    Silvery water. A second leaning tower and more islands in the
    distance. Cool and pleasant, with that lovely sense of evening
    in the air which comes only in spring. They said it would be
    cold in Venice, but it isn’t. Birds twittering, the waters of
    the bay waveless, the red, white and brown colors of the city
    showing in rich patches. I think if there is a heaven on earth,
    it is Venice in spring.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Just now the sun came out and I witnessed a Turner effect.
    First this lovely bay was suffused with a silvery-gold
    light--its very surface. Then the clouds in the west broke
    into ragged masses. The sails, the islands, the low buildings
    in the distance began to stand out brilliantly. Even the
    Campanile, San Giorgio Maggiore and the Salute took on an added
    glory. I was witnessing a great sky-and-water song, a poem, a
    picture--something to identify Venice with my life. Three ducks
    went by, high in the air, honking as they went. A long black
    flotilla of thin-prowed coal barges passed in the foreground.
    The engines of a passing steamer beat rhythmically and I
    breathed deep and joyously to think I had witnessed all.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Bells over the water, the lap of waves, the smell of seaweed.
    How soft and elevated and ethereal voices sound at this time.
    An Italian sailor, sitting on the grass looking out over it
    all, has his arms about his girl.

       *       *       *       *       *

    It would be easy to give an order for ten thousand lovely views
    of Venice, and get them.

       *       *       *       *       *





CHAPTER XLI

VENICE


Aside from the cathedral of St. Mark’s, the Doge’s Palace and the
Academy or Venetian gallery of old masters, I could find little of
artistic significance in Venice--little aside from the wonderful
spectacle of the city as a whole. As a spectacle, viewed across the
open space of water, known as the Lagoon, the churches of San Giorgio
Maggiore and Santa Maria della Salute with their domes and campaniles
strangely transfigured by light and air, are beautiful. Close at hand,
for me, they lost much romance which distance gave them, though the
mere space of their interiors was impressive. The art, according to
my judgment, was bad and in the main I noticed that my guide books
agreed with me--spiritless religious representations which, after the
Sistine Chapel in Rome and such pictures as those of Michelangelo’s
“Holy Family” and Botticelli’s “Adoration of the Magi” in the Uffizi
at Florence, were without import. I preferred to speculate on the fear
of the plague which had produced the Salute and the discovery of the
body of St. Stephen, the martyr, which had given rise to San Giorgio,
for it was interesting to think, with these facts before me, how art
and spectacle in life so often take their rise from silly, almost
pointless causes and a plain lie is more often the foundation of a
great institution than a truth. Santa Maria didn’t save the citizens
of Venice from the plague in 1630, and in 1110 the Doge Ordelafo
Faliero did not bring back the true body of St. Stephen from Palestine,
although he may have thought he did,--at least there are other “true
bodies.” But the old, silly progress of illusion, vanity, politics and
the like has produced these and other institutions throughout the world
and will continue to do so, no doubt, until time shall be no more.
It was interesting to me to see the once large and really beautiful
Dominican monastery surrounding San Giorgio turned into barracks and
offices for government officials. I do not see why these churches
should not be turned into libraries or galleries. Their religious
import is quite gone.

In Venice it was, I think, that I got a little sick of churches and
second- and third-rate art. The city itself is so beautiful, exteriorly
speaking, that only the greatest art could be tolerated here, yet
aside from the Academy, which is crowded with canvases by Bellini,
Tintoretto, Titian, Veronese and others of the Venetian school, and the
Ducal Palace, largely decorated by Tintoretto and Veronese, there is
nothing, save of course St. Mark’s. Outside of that and the churches of
the Salute and San Giorgio,--both bad, artistically, I think,--there
are thirty-three or thirty-four other churches all with bits of
something which gets them into the catalogues, a Titian, a Tintoretto,
a Giorgione or a Paolo Veronese, until the soul wearies and you say to
yourself--“Well, I’ve had about enough of this--what is the use?”

There is no use. Unless you are tracing the rise of religious art, or
trying to visit the tombs of semi-celebrated persons, or following out
the work of some one man or group of men to the last fragment you might
as well desist. There is nothing in it. I sought church after church,
entering dark, pleasant, but not often imposing, interiors only to
find a single religious representation of one kind or another hardly
worth the trouble. In the Frari I found Titian’s famous Madonna of the
Pescaro family and a pretentious mausoleum commemorating Canova, and in
Santa Maria Formosa Palma Vecchio’s St. Barbara and four other saints,
which appealed to me very much, but in the main I was disappointed
and made dreary. After St. Peter’s, the Vatican, St. Paul’s Without
the Walls in Rome, the cathedrals at Pisa and elsewhere, and the
great galleries of Florence, Venice seemed to me artistically dull. I
preferred always to get out into the streets again to see the small
shops, to encounter the winding canals, to cross the little bridges and
to feel that here was something new and different, far different and
more artistic than anything which any church or museum could show.

One of the strangest things about Venice to me was the curious manner
in which you could always track a great public square or market place
of some kind by following some thin trickling of people you would
find making their way in a given direction. Suddenly in some quite
silent residence section, with all its lovely waterways about you,
you would encounter a small thin stream of people going somewhere,
perhaps five or six in a row, over bridges, up narrow alleys, over
more bridges, through squares or triangles past churches or small
stores and constantly swelling in volume until you found yourself in
the midst of a small throng turning now right, now left, when suddenly
you came out on the great open market place or piazza to which they
were all tending. They always struck me as a sheep-like company, these
Venetians, very mild, very soft, pattering here and there with vague,
almost sad eyes. Here in Venice I saw no newspapers displayed at all,
nor ever heard any called, nor saw any read. There was none of that
morning vigor which characterizes an American city. It was always more
like a quiet village scene to me than any aspect of a fair-sized city.
Yet because I was comfortable in Venice and because all the while I
was there it was so radiantly beautiful, I left it with real sorrow. To
me it was perfect.

       *       *       *       *       *

The one remaining city of Italy that I was yet to see, Milan, because
already I had seen so much of Italy and because I was eager to get into
Switzerland and Germany, was of small interest to me. It was a long,
tedious ride to Milan, and I spent my one day there rambling about
without enthusiasm. Outside of a half-dozen early Christian basilicas,
which I sedulously avoided (I employed a guide), there was only the
cathedral, the now dismantled palace and fortress of the Sforzas
masquerading as a museum and the local art gallery, an imposing affair
crowded with that same religious art work of the Renaissance which,
one might almost say in the language of the Milwaukee brewer, had made
Italy famous. I was, however, about fed up on art. As a cathedral that
of Milan seemed as imposing as any, great and wonderful. I was properly
impressed with its immense stained-glass windows, said to be the
largest in the world, its fifty-two columns supporting its great roof,
its ninety-eight pinnacles and two thousand statues. Of a splendid
edifice such as this there is really nothing to say--it is like Amiens,
Rouen, and Canterbury--simply astounding. It would be useless to
attempt to describe the emotions it provoked, as useless as to indicate
the feelings some of the pictures in the local gallery aroused in me.
It would be Amiens all over again, or some of the pictures in the
Uffizi. It seemed to me the newest of all the Gothic cathedrals I saw,
absolutely preserved in all its details and as recently erected as
yesterday, yet it was begun in 1386.

The wonder of this and of every other cathedral like it that I saw,
to me, was never their religious but their artistic significance.
Some one with a splendid imagination must always have been behind each
one--and I can never understand the character or the temper of an age
or a people that will let anything happen to them.

But if I found little of thrilling artistic significance after Rome
and the south I was strangely impressed with the modernity of Milan.
Europe, to me, is not so old in its texture anywhere as one would
suppose. Most European cities of large size are of recent growth, just
as American cities are. So many of the great buildings that we think
of as time-worn, such as the Ducal Palace at Venice, and elsewhere,
are in an excellent state of preservation--quite new looking. Venice
has many new buildings in the old style. Rome is largely composed of
modern tenements and apartment houses. There are elevators in Perugia,
and when you reach Milan you find it newer than St. Louis or Cleveland.
If there is any medieval spirit anywhere remaining in Milan I could
not find it. The shops are bright and attractive. There are large
department stores, and the honk-honk of the automobile is quite as
common here as anywhere. It has only five hundred thousand population,
but, even so, it evidences great commercial force. If you ride out in
the suburbs, as I did, you see new houses, new factories, new streets,
new everything. Unlike the inhabitants of southern Italy, the people
are large physically and I did not understand this until I learned
that they are freely mingled with the Germans. The Germans are here in
force, in control of the silk mills, the leather manufactories, the
restaurants, the hotels, the book stores and printing establishments.
It is a wonder to me that they are not in control of the Opera House
and the musical activities, and I have no doubt that they influence it
greatly. The director of La Scala ought to be a German, if he is not.
I got a first suggestion of Paris in the tables set before the cafés
in the Arcade of Vittorio Emanuele and had my first taste of Germany
in the purely German beer-halls with their orchestras of men or women,
where for a few cents expended for beer you can sit by the hour and
listen to the music. In the hotel where I stopped the German precision
of regulation was as marked as anywhere in Germany. It caused me to
wonder whether the Germans would eventually sweep down and possess
Italy and, if they did, what they would make of it or what Italy would
make of them.




CHAPTER XLII

LUCERNE


I entered Switzerland at Chiasso, a little way from Lake Como in
Italy, and left it at Basle near the German frontier, and all I saw
was mountains--mountains--mountains--some capped with snow and some
without, tall, sharp, craggy peaks, and rough, sharp declivities, with
here and there a patch of grass, here and there a deep valley, here
and there a lonely, wide-roofed, slab-built house with those immense
projecting eaves first made familiar to me by the shabby adaptations
which constitute our “L” stations in New York. The landscape hardens
perceptibly a little way out of Milan. High slopes and deep lakes
appear. At Chiasso, the first stop in Switzerland, I handed the guard
a half-dozen letters I had written in Milan and stamped with Italian
stamps. I did not know until I did this that we were out of Italy, had
already changed guards and that a new crew--Swiss--was in charge of
the train. “Monsieur,” he said, tapping the stamp significantly, “vous
êtes en Suisse.” I do not understand French, but I did comprehend that,
and I perceived also that I was talking to a Swiss. All the people
on the platform were “Schweitzers” as the Germans call them, fair,
chunky, stolid-looking souls without a touch of that fire or darkness
so generally present a few miles south. Why should a distance of ten
miles, five miles, make such an astonishing change? It is one of the
strangest experiences of travel, to cross an imaginary boundary-line
and find everything different; people, dress, architecture, landscape,
often soil and foliage. It proves that countries are not merely soil
and climatic conditions but that there is something more--a race stock
which is not absolutely a product of the soil and which refuses to
yield entirely to climate. Races like animals have an origin above
soil and do hold their own in spite of changed or changing climatic
conditions. Cross any boundary you like from one country into another
and judge for yourself.

Now that I was started, really out of Italy, I was ready for any
change, the more marked the better; and here was one. Switzerland is
about as much like Italy as a rock is like a bouquet of flowers--a
sharp-edged rock and a rich colorful, odorous bouquet. And yet, in
spite of all its chill, bare bleakness, its high ridges and small
shut-in valleys, it has beauty, cold but real. As the train sped on
toward Lucerne I kept my face glued to the window-pane on one side or
the other, standing most of the time in the corridor, and was rewarded
constantly by a magnificent panorama. Such bleak, sharp crags as stood
always above us, such cold, white fields of snow! Sometimes the latter
stretched down toward us in long deep cañons or ravines until they
disappeared as thin white streaks at the bottom. I saw no birds of any
kind flying; no gardens nor patches of flowers anywhere, only brown or
gray or white châlets with heavy overhanging eaves and an occasional
stocky, pale-skinned citizen in a short jacket, knee trousers, small
round hat and flamboyant waistcoat. I wondered whether I was really
seeing the national costume. I was. I saw more of it at Lucerne,
that most hotelly of cities, and in the mountains and valleys of the
territory beyond it--toward Basle. Somebody once said of God that he
might love all the creatures he had made but he certainly couldn’t
admire them. I will reverse that for Switzerland. I might always
admire its wonders but I could never love them.

And yet after hours and hours of just this twisting and turning
up slope and down valley, when I reached Lucerne I thought it was
utterly beautiful. Long before we reached there the lake appeared
and we followed its shores, whirling in and out of tunnels and along
splendid slopes. Arrived at Lucerne, I came out into the piazza
which spreads before the station to the very edge of the lake. I was
instantly glad that I had included Lucerne in my itinerary. It was
evening and the lamps in the village (it is not a large city) were
already sparkling and the water of the lake not only reflected the
glow of the lamps along its shores but the pale pinks and mauves
over the tops of the peaks in the west. There was snow on the upper
stretches of the mountains but down here in this narrow valley filled
with quaint houses, hotels, churches and modern apartments, all was
balmy and pleasant,--not at all cold. My belongings were bundled into
the attendant ’bus and I was rattled off to one of the best hotels
I saw abroad--the National--of the Ritz-Carlton system; very quiet,
very ornate, and with all those conveniences and comforts which the
American has learned to expect, plus a European standard of service and
politeness of which we can as yet know nothing in America.

I am afraid I have an insatiable appetite for natural beauty. I am
entertained by character, thrilled by art, but of all the enlarging
spiritual influences the natural panorama is to me the most important.
This night, after my first day of rambling about Lucerne, I sat out
on my hotel balcony, overlooking the lake and studied the dim moonlit
outlines of the peaks crowding about it, the star-shine reflected in
the water, the still distances and the moon sinking over the peaks
to the west of the quaint city. Art has no method of including, or
suggesting even, these vast sidereal spaces. The wonder of the night
and moonlight is scarcely for the painter’s brush. It belongs in verse,
the drama, great literary pageants such as those of Balzac, Turgenieff
and Flaubert, but not in pictures. The human eye can see so much and
the human heart responds so swiftly that it is only by suggestion that
anything is achieved in art. Art cannot give you the night in all its
fullness save as, by suggestion, it brings back the wonder of the
reality which you have already felt and seen.

I think perhaps of the two impressions that I retained most distinctly
of Lucerne, that of the evening and of the morning, the morning was
best. I came out on my balcony at dawn, the first morning after I
arrived, when the lake was lying below me in glassy, olive-black
stillness. Up the bank to my left were trees, granite slopes, a small
châlet built out over the water, its spiles standing in the still lake
in a soothing, restful way. To my right, at the foot of the lake, lay
Lucerne, its quaint outlines but vaguely apparent in the shadow. Across
the lake only a little space were small boats, a dock, a church, and
beyond them, in a circle, gray-black peaks. At their extreme summits
along a rough, horny skyline were the suggestions of an electric dawn,
a pale, steely gray brightening from dark into light.

It was not cold at Lucerne, though it was as yet only early March. The
air was as soft and balmy as at Venice. As I sat there the mountain
skyline brightened first to a faint pink, the snow on the ridges took
on a lavender and bluish hue as at evening, the green of the lower
slopes became softly visible and the water began to reflect the light
of the sky, the shadow of the banks, the little boats, and even some
wild ducks flying over its surface,--ducks coming from what bleak,
drear spaces I could only guess. Presently I saw a man come out from
a hotel, enter a small canoe and paddle away in the direction of the
upper lake. No other living thing appeared until the sky had changed
from pink to blue, the water to a rich silvery gray, the green to a
translucent green and the rays of the sun came finally glistering over
the peaks. Then the rough notches and gaps of the mountains--gray where
blown clear of snow, or white where filled with it--took on a sharp,
brilliant roughness. You could see the cold peaks outlined clearly
in the water, and the little steeples of the churches. My wild ducks
were still paddling briskly about. I noticed that a particular pair
found great difficulty in finding the exact spot to suit them. With a
restless quank, quank, quank, they would rise and fly a space only to
light with a soft splatter and quack cheerfully. When they saw the lone
rower returning they followed him, coming up close to the hotel dock
and paddling smartly in his vicinity. I watched him fasten his boat and
contemplate the ducks. After he had gone away I wondered if they were
pets of his. Then the day having clearly come, I went inside.

By ten o’clock all Lucerne seemed to have come out to promenade
along the smooth walks that border the shore. Pretty church-bells in
severe, conical towers began to ring and students in small, dark,
tambourine-like hats, jackets, tight trousers, and carrying little
canes about the size of batons, began to walk smartly up and down.
There were a few travelers present, wintering here, no doubt,--English
and Americans presenting their usual severe, intellectual, inquiring
and self-protective dispositions. They stood out in sharp contrast to
the native Swiss,--a fair, stolid, quiescent people. The town itself
by day I found to be as clean, spruce and orderly as a private pine
forest. I never saw a more spick and span place, not even in ge-washed
and ge-brushed Germany.

This being Sunday and wonderfully fair, I decided to take the trip
up the lake on one of the two small steamers that I saw anchored at
apparently rival docks. They may have served boats plying on different
arms of the lake. On this trip I fell in with a certain “Major Y.
Myata, M.D., Surgeon, Imperial Japanese Army” as his card read,
who, I soon learned, was doing Europe much as I was, only entirely
alone. I first saw him as he bought his ticket on board the steamer
at Lucerne,--a small, quiet, wiry man, very keen and observant, who
addressed the purser in English first and later in German. He came on
the top deck into the first-class section, a fair-sized camera slung
over his shoulder, a notebook sticking out of the pocket, and finding a
seat, very carefully dusted his small feet with the extreme corners of
his military overcoat, and rubbed his thin, horse-hairy mustache with a
small, claw-like hand. He looked about in a quiet way and began after
the boat started to take pictures and make copious notes. He had small,
piercing, bird-like eyes and a strangely unconscious-seeming manner
which was in reality anything but unconscious. We fell to talking of
Switzerland, Germany and Italy, where he had been, and by degrees I
learned the route of his trip, or what he chose to tell me of it, and
his opinions concerning Europe and the Far East--as much as he chose to
communicate.

It appeared that before coming to Europe this time he had made but
one other trip out of Japan, namely to California, where he had spent
a year. He had left Japan in October, sailed direct for London and
reached it in November; had already been through Holland and Belgium,
France, Germany, Italy, and was bound for Munich and Hungary and,
not strange to relate, Russia. He was coming to America--New York
particularly, and was eager to know of a good hotel. I mentioned
twenty. He spoke English, French, Italian and German, although he
had never before been anywhere except to California. I knew he spoke
German, for I talked to him in that language and after finding that
he could speak it better than I could I took his word for the rest.
We lunched together. I mentioned the little I knew of the Japanese in
New York. He brightened considerably. We compared travel notes--Italy,
France, England. “I do not like the Italians,” he observed in one
place. “I think they are tricky. They do not tell the truth.”

“They probably held up your baggage at the station.”

“They did more than that to me. I could never depend on them.”

“How do you like the Germans?” I asked him.

“A very wonderful people. Very civil I thought. The Rhine is beautiful.”

I had to smile when I learned that he had done the night cafés of
Paris, had contrasted English and French farce as represented by
the Empire and the Folies-Bergère, and knew all about the Post
Impressionists and the Futurists or Cubists. The latter he did not
understand. “It is possible,” he said in his strange, sing-songy way,
“that they represent some motives of constructive subconscious mind
with which we are not any of us familiar yet. Electricity came to man
in some such way as that. I do not know. I do not pretend to understand
it.”

At the extreme upper end of Lucerne where the boat stopped, we decided
to get out and take the train back. He was curious to see the shrine or
tomb of William Tell which was listed as being near here, but when he
learned that it was two or three miles and that we would miss a fast
train, he was willing to give it up. With a strange, old-world wisdom
he commented on the political organization of Switzerland, saying that
it struck him as strange that these Alpine fastnesses should ever have
achieved an identity of their own. “They have always been separate
communities until quite recently,” he said, “and I think that perhaps
only railroads, tunnels, telegraph and telephone have made their
complete union satisfactory now.”

I marveled at the wisdom of this Oriental as I do at so many of them.
They are so intensely matter-of-fact and practical. Their industry is
uncanny. This man talked to me of Alpine botany as contrasted with that
of some of the mountain regions of Japan and then we talked of Lincoln,
Grant, Washington, Li Hung Chang and Richard Wagner. He suggested quite
simply that it was probable that Germany’s only artistic outlet was
music.

I was glad to have the company of Major Myata for dinner that same
evening, for nothing could have been duller than the very charming
Louis Quinze dining-room filled with utterly conventional American and
English visitors. Small, soldierly, erect, he made quite an impression
as he entered with me. The Major had been in two battles of the
Russian-Japanese War and had witnessed an attack somewhere one night
after midnight in a snowstorm. Here at table as he proceeded to explain
in his quiet way, by means of knives and forks, the arrangement of the
lines and means of caring for the wounded, I saw the various diners
studying him. He was a very forceful-looking person. Very. He told me
of the manner in which the sanitary and surgical equipment and control
of the Japanese army had been completely revolutionized since the date
of the Japanese-Russian War and that now all the present equipment was
new. “The great things in our army to-day,” he observed very quietly
at one point, “are artillery and sanitation.” A fine combination! He
left me at midnight, after several hours in various cafés.




CHAPTER XLIII

ENTERING GERMANY


If a preliminary glance at Switzerland suggested to me a high
individuality, primarily Teutonic but secondarily national and
distinctive, all I saw afterwards in Germany and Holland with which I
contrasted it, confirmed my first impression. I believe that the Swiss,
for all that they speak the German language and have an architecture
that certainly has much in common with that of medieval Germany, are
yet of markedly diverging character. They struck me in the main as
colder, more taciturn, more introspective and less flamboyant than the
Germans. The rank and file, in so far as I could see, were extremely
sparing, saving, reserved. They reminded me more of such Austrians and
Tyrolians as I have known, than of Germans. They were thinner, livelier
in their actions, not so lusty nor yet so aggressive.

The new architecture which I saw between Lucerne and the German
frontier reminded me of much of that which one sees in northern Ohio
and Indiana and southern Michigan. There are still traces of the
over-elaborate curlicue type of structure and decoration so interesting
as being representative of medieval Teutonic life, but not much. The
new manufacturing towns were very clean and spruce with modern factory
buildings of the latest almost-all-glass type; and churches and public
buildings, obviously an improvement or an attempt at improvement on
older Swiss and Teutonic ideals, were everywhere apparent. Lucerne
itself is divided into an old section, honored and preserved for its
historic and commercial value, as being attractive to travelers; a
new section, crowded with stores, tenements and apartments of the
latest German and American type; and a hotel section, filled with large
Anglicized and Parisianized structures, esplanades, small lounging
squares and the like. I never bothered to look at Thorwaldsen’s famous
lion. One look at a photograph years ago alienated me forever.

I had an interesting final talk on the morning of my departure from
Lucerne with the resident manager of the hotel who was only one of
many employees of a company that controlled, so he told me, hotels
in Berlin, Frankfort, Paris, Rome and London. He had formerly been
resident manager of a hotel in Frankfort, the one to which I was going,
and said that he might be transferred any time to some other one. He
was the man, as I learned, whom I had seen rowing on the lake the first
morning I sat out on my balcony--the one whom the wild ducks followed.

“I saw you,” I said as I paid my bill, “out rowing on the lake the
other morning. I should say that was pleasant exercise.”

“I always do it,” he said very cheerfully. He was a tall, pale,
meditative man with a smooth, longish, waxen countenance and very dark
hair. He was the last word as to toilet and courtesy. “I am glad to
have the chance. I love nature.”

“Are those wild ducks I see on the lake flying about?”

“Oh, yes. We have lots of them. They are not allowed to be shot. That’s
why they come here. We have gulls, too. There is a whole flock of gulls
that comes here every winter. I feed them right out here at the dock
every day.”

“Why, where can they come from?” I asked. “This is a long way from the
sea.”

“I know it,” he replied. “It is strange. They come over the Alps from
the Mediterranean I suppose. You will see them on the Rhine, too, if
you go there. I don’t know. They come though. Sometimes they leave for
four or five days or a week, but they always come back. The captain of
the steamer tells me he thinks they go to some other lake. They know me
though. When they come back in the fall and I go out to feed them they
make a great fuss.”

“They are the same gulls, then?”

“The very same.”

I had to smile.

“Those two ducks are great friends of mine, too,” he went on, referring
to the two I had seen following him. “They always come up to the dock
when I come out and when I come back from my row they come again. Oh,
they make a great clatter.”

He looked at me and smiled in a pleased way.

       *       *       *       *       *

The train which I boarded at Lucerne was a through express from Milan
to Frankfort with special cars for Paris and Berlin. It was crowded
with Germans of a ruddy, solid variety, radiating health, warmth,
assurance, defiance. I never saw a more marked contrast than existed
between these travelers on the train and the local Swiss outside. The
latter seemed much paler and less forceful by contrast, though not less
intellectual and certainly more refined.

One stout, German lady, with something like eighteen packages, had made
a veritable express room of her second-class compartment. The average
traveler, entitled to a seat beside her, would take one look at her
defenses and pass on. She was barricaded beyond any hope of successful
attack.

I watched interestedly to see how the character of the people, soil and
climate would change as we crossed the frontier into Germany. Every
other country I had entered had presented a great contrast to the last.
After passing fifteen or twenty Swiss towns and small cities, perhaps
more, we finally reached Basle and there the crew was changed. I did
not know it, being busy thinking of other things, until an immense,
rotund, guttural-voiced conductor appeared at the door and wanted to
know if I was bound for Frankfort. I looked out. It was just as I
expected: another world and another atmosphere had been substituted
for that of Switzerland. Already the cars and depot platforms were
different, heavier I thought, more pretentious. Heavy German porters
(packträger) were in evidence. The cars, the vast majority of them
here, bore the label of Imperial Germany--the wide-winged, black eagle
with the crown above it, painted against a pinkish-white background,
with the inscription “Kaiserlicher Deutsche Post.” A station-master,
erect as a soldier, very large, with splendiferous parted whiskers,
arrayed in a blue uniform and cap, regulated the departure of
trains. The “Uscita” and “Entrata” of Italy here became “Eingang”
and “Ausgang,” and the “Bagaglia” of every Italian station was here
“Gepäck.” The endless German “Verboten,” and “Es ist untersagt” also
came into evidence. We rolled out into a wide, open, flat, mountainless
plain with only the thin poplars of France in evidence and no waterways
of any kind, and then I knew that Switzerland was truly no more.

If you want to see how the lesser Teutonic countries vary from this
greater one, the dominant German Empire, pass this way from Switzerland
into Germany, or from Germany into Holland. At Basle, as I have said,
we left the mountains for once and for all. I saw but few frozen peaks
after Lucerne. As we approached Basle they seemed to grow less and
less and beyond that we entered a flat plain, as flat as Kansas and as
arable as the Mississippi Valley, which stretched unbroken from Basle
to Frankfort and from Frankfort to Berlin. Judging from what I saw the
major part of Germany is a vast prairie, as flat as a pancake and as
thickly strewn with orderly, new, bright forceful towns as England is
with quaint ones.

However, now that I was here, I observed that it was just these
qualities which make Germany powerful and the others weak. Such
thoroughness, such force, such universal superintendence! Truly it is
amazing. Once you are across the border, if you are at all sensitive to
national or individual personalities you can feel it, vital, glowing,
entirely superior and more ominous than that of Switzerland, or Italy,
and often less pleasant. It is very much like the heat and glow of a
furnace. Germany is a great forge or workshop. It resounds with the
industry of a busy nation; it has all the daring and assurance of a
successful man; it struts, commands, defies, asserts itself at every
turn. You would not want to witness greater variety of character than
you could by passing from England through France into Germany. After
the stolidity and civility of the English, and the lightness and spirit
of France, the blazing force and defiance of the Germans comes upon you
as almost the most amazing of all.

In spite of the fact that my father was German and that I have known
more or less of Germans all my life, I cannot say that I admired the
personnel of the German Empire, the little that I saw of it, half so
much as I admired some of the things they had apparently achieved.
All the stations that I saw in Germany were in apple-pie order, new,
bright, well-ordered. Big blue-lettered signs indicated just the things
you wanted to know. The station platforms were exceedingly well built
of red tile and white stone; the tracks looked as though they were
laid on solid hardwood ties; the train ran as smoothly as if there
were no flaws in it anywhere and it ran swiftly. I had to smile as
occasionally on a platform--the train speeding swiftly--a straight,
upstanding German officer or official, his uniform looking like new,
his boots polished, his gold epaulets and buckles shining as brightly
as gold can shine, his blond whiskers, red cap, glistening glasses or
bright monocle, and above all his sharp, clear eyes looking directly
at you, making an almost amazing combination of energy, vitality and
superiority, came into view and disappeared again. It gave you a
startling impression of the whole of Germany. “Are they all like that?”
I asked myself. “Is the army really so dashing and forceful?”

As I traveled first to Frankfort, then to Mayence, Coblenz and Cologne
and again from Cologne to Frankfort and Berlin, and thence out of
the country via Holland, the wonder grew. I should say now that if
Germany has any number of defects of temperament, and it truly has from
almost any American point of view, it has virtues and capacities so
noteworthy, admirable and advantageous that the whole world may well
sit up and take notice. The one thing that came home to me with great
force was that Germany is in no way loose jointed or idle but, on the
contrary, strong, red-blooded, avid, imaginative. Germany is a terrific
nation, hopeful, courageous, enthusiastic, orderly, self-disciplining,
at present anyhow, and if it can keep its pace without engaging in
some vast, self-destroying conflict, it can become internally so
powerful that it will almost stand irresistible. I should say that any
nation that to-day chose to pick a quarrel with Germany on her home
ground would be foolish in the extreme. It is the beau ideal of the
aggressive, militant, orderly spirit and, if it were properly captained
and the gods were kind, it would be everywhere invincible.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I entered Germany it was with just two definite things in mind.
One was to seek out my father’s birthplace, a little hamlet, as I
understood it, called Mayen, located somewhere between the Moselle and
the Rhine at Coblenz,--the region where the Moselle wines come from.
The other was to visit Berlin and see what Germany’s foremost city was
really like and to get a look at the Kaiser if possible. In both of
these I was quickly successful, though after I reached Frankfort some
other things transpired which were not on the program.

Frankfort was a disappointment to me at first. It was a city of over
four hundred thousand population, clean, vigorous, effective; but I
saw it in a rain, to begin with, and I did not like it. It was too
squat in appearance--too unvarying in its lines; it seemed to have
no focal point such as one finds in all medieval cities. What has
come over the spirit of city governments, directing architects, and
individual enterprise? Is there no one who wants really to do the very
exceptional thing? No German city I saw had a central heart worthy of
the name--no Piazza del Campidoglio such as Rome has; no Piazza della
Signoria such as Florence has; no Piazza San Marco such as Venice has;
not even a cathedral center, lovely thing that it is, such as Milan
has. Paris with its Gardens of the Tuileries, its Champs-de-Mars, its
Esplanades des Invalides, and its Arc de Triomphe and Place de l’Opéra,
does so much better in this matter than any German city has dreamed of
doing. Even London has its splendid focal point about the Houses of
Parliament, St. Paul’s and the Embankment, which are worth something.
But German cities! Yet they are worthy cities, every one of them, and
far more vital than those of Italy.

I should like to relate first, however, the story of the vanishing
birthplace. Ever since I was three or four years old and dandled on my
father’s knee in our Indiana homestead, I had heard more or less of
Mayen, Coblenz, and the region on the Rhine from which my father came.
As we all know, the Germans are a sentimental, fatherland-loving race
and my father, honest German Catholic that he was, was no exception.
He used to tell me what a lovely place Mayen was, how the hills rose
about it, how grape-growing was its principal industry, how there were
castles there and grafs and rich burghers, and how there was a wall
about the city which in his day constituted it an armed fortress, and
how often as a little child he had been taken out through some one of
its great gates seated on the saddle of some kindly minded cavalryman
and galloped about the drill-ground. He seems to have become, by the
early death of his mother and second marriage of his father, a rather
unwelcome stepchild and, early, to escape being draughted for the
Prussian army which had seized this town--which only a few years before
had belonged to France, though German enough in character--he had
secretly decamped to the border with three others and so made his way
to Paris. Later he came to America, made his way by degrees to Indiana,
established a woolen-mill on the banks of the Wabash at Terre Haute and
there, after marrying in Ohio, raised his large family. His first love
was his home town, however, and Prussia, which he admired; and to his
dying day he never ceased talking about it. On more than one occasion
he told me he would like to go back, just to see how things were, but
the Prussian regulations concerning deserters or those who avoided
service were so drastic and the likelihood of his being recognized
so great that he was afraid of being seized and at least thrown into
prison if not shot, so he never ventured it. I fancy this danger of
arrest and his feeling that he could not return cast an additional
glamour over the place and the region which he could never revisit.
Anyhow I was anxious to see Mayen and to discover if the family name
still persisted there.

When I consulted with the Cook’s agent at Rome he had promptly
announced, “There isn’t any such place as Mayen. You’re thinking of
Mayence, near Frankfort, on the Rhine.”

“No,” I said, “I’m not. I’m thinking of Mayen--M-a-y-e-n. Now you look
and see.”

“There isn’t any such place, I tell you,” he replied courteously. “It’s
Mayence, not very far from Frankfort.”

“Let me see,” I argued, looking at his map. “It’s near the junction of
the Rhine and the Moselle.”

“Mayence is the place. See, here it is. Here’s the Moselle and here’s
Mayence.”

I looked, and sure enough they seemed reasonably close together. “All
right,” I said, “give me a ticket to Berlin via Mayence.”

“I’ll book you to Frankfort. That’s only thirty minutes away. There’s
nothing of interest at Mayence--not even a good hotel.”

Arrived at Frankfort, I decided not to send my trunks to the hotel as
yet but to take one light bag, leaving the remainder “_im Gepäck_” and
see what I could at Mayence. I might want to stay all night, wandering
about my father’s old haunts, and I might want to go down the Rhine a
little way--I was not sure.

The Mayence to which I was going was not the Mayen that I wanted, but
I did not know that. You have heard of people weeping over the wrong
tombstones. This was a case in point. Fortunately I was going in the
direction of the real Mayen, though I did not know that either. I ran
through a country which reminded me very much of the region in which
Terre Haute is located and I said to myself quite wisely: “Now I can
see why my father and so many other Germans from this region settled in
southern Indiana. It is like their old home. The wide, flat fields are
the same.”

When we reached Mayence and I had deposited my kit-bag, for the time
being I strolled out into the principal streets wondering whether I
should get the least impression of the city or town as it was when
my father was here as a boy. It is curious and amusing how we can
delude ourselves at times. Mayence I really knew, if I had stopped
to consider, could not be the Mayen, where my father was born. The
former was the city of that Bishop-Elector Albert of Brandenburg who
in need of a large sum of money to pay Rome for the privilege of
assuming the archbishopric, when he already held two other sees, made
an arrangement with Pope Leo X--the Medici pope who was then trying to
raise money to rebuild or enlarge St. Peter’s--to superintend the sale
of indulgences in Germany (taking half the proceeds in reward for his
services) and thus by arousing the ire of Luther helped to bring about
the Reformation in Germany. This was the city also of that amiable
Dominican Prior, John Tetzel, who, once appealing for ready purchasers
for his sacerdotal wares declared:

“Do you not hear your dead parents crying out ‘Have mercy on us? We
are in sore pain and you can set us free for a mere pittance. We have
borne you, we have trained and educated you, we have left you all our
property, and you are so hard-hearted and cruel that you leave us to
roast in the flames when you could so easily release us.’”

I shall always remember Mayence by that ingenious advertisement. My
father had described to me a small, walled town with frowning castles
set down in a valley among hills. He had said over and over that it
was located at the junction of the Rhine and the Moselle. I recalled
afterward that he told me that the city of Coblenz was very near by,
but in my brisk effort to find this place quickly I had forgotten that.
Here I was in a region which contained not a glimpse of any hills from
within the city, the Moselle was all of a hundred miles away, and no
walls of any medieval stronghold were visible anywhere and yet I was
reasonably satisfied that this was the place.

“Dear me,” I thought, “how Mayence has grown. My father wouldn’t know
it.” (Baedeker gave its population at one hundred and ten thousand).
“How Germany has grown in the sixty-five years since he was here. It
used to be a town of three or four thousand. Now it is a large city.” I
read about it assiduously in Baedeker and looked at the rather thriving
streets of the business heart, trying to visualize it as it should have
been in 1843. Until midnight I was wandering about in the dark and
bright streets of Mayence, satisfying myself with the thought that I
was really seeing the city in which my father was born.

For a city of so much historic import Mayence was very dull. It was
built after the theories of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries
with, however, many modern improvements. The Cathedral was a botch,
ornamented with elaborate statues of stuffy bishops and electors. The
houses were done in many places in that heavy scroll fashion common to
medieval Germany. The streets were narrow and winding. I saw an awful
imitation of our modern Coney Island in the shape of a moving circus
which was camped on one of the public camping places. A dull heavy
place, all told.

Coming into the breakfast-room of my hotel the next morning, I
encountered a man who looked to me like a German traveling salesman.
He had brought his grip down to the desk and was consuming his morning
coffee and rolls with great gusto, the while he read his paper. I said
to him, “Do you know of any place in this part of Germany that is
called Mayen?--not Mayence.” I wanted to make sure of my location.

“Mayen? Mayen?” he replied. “Why, yes. I think there is such a place
near Coblenz. It isn’t very large.”

“Coblenz! That’s it,” I replied, recalling now what my father had told
me of Coblenz. “To be sure. How far is that?”

“Oh, that is all of three hours from here. It is at the juncture of the
Moselle.”

“Do you know how the trains run?” I asked, getting up, a feeling of
disgusted disappointment spreading over me.

“I think there is one around half-past nine or ten.”

“Damn!” I said, realizing what a dunce I had been. I had just
forty-five minutes in which to pay my bill and make the train. Three
hours more! I could have gone on the night before.

I hurried out, secured my bag, paid my bill and was off. On the way
I had myself driven to the old “Juden-Gasse,” said to be full of
picturesque medieval houses, for a look. I reached the depot in time
to have a two-minute argument with my driver as to whether he was
entitled to two marks or one--one being a fair reward--and then hurried
into my train. In a half hour we were at Bingen-on-the-Rhine, and in
three-quarters of an hour those lovely hills and ravines which make
the Rhine so picturesque had begun, and they continued all the way to
Coblenz and below that to Cologne.




CHAPTER XLIV

A MEDIEVAL TOWN


After Italy and Switzerland the scenery of the Rhine seemed very mild
and unpretentious to me, yet it was very beautiful. The Hudson from
Albany to New York is far more imposing. A score of American rivers
such as the Penobscot, the New in West Virginia, the James above
Lynchburg, the Rio Grande, and others would make the Rhine seem simple
by comparison; yet it has an individuality so distinct that it is
unforgetable. I always marvel over this thing--personality. Nothing
under the sun explains it. So, often you can say “this is finer,” “that
is more imposing,” “by comparison this is nothing,” but when you have
said all this, the thing with personality rises up and triumphs. So it
is with the Rhine. Like millions before me and millions yet to come, I
watched its slopes, its castles, its islands, its pretty little German
towns passing in review before the windows of this excellent train and
decided that in its way nothing could be finer. It had personality. A
snatch of old wall, with peach trees in blossom; a long thin side-wheel
steamer, one smokestack fore and another aft, labeled “William Egan
Gesellschaft”; a dismantled castle tower, with a flock of crows flying
about it and hills laid out in ordered squares of vines gave it all the
charm it needed.

When Coblenz was reached, I bustled out, ready to inspect Mayen at
once. Another disappointment. Mayen was not at Coblenz but fifteen or
eighteen miles away on a small branch road, the trains of which ran
just four times a day, but I did not learn this until, as usual, I had
done considerable investigating. According to my map Mayen appeared
to be exactly at the junction of the Rhine and the Moselle, which was
here, but when I asked a small boy dancing along a Coblenz street where
the Moselle was, he informed me, “If you walk fast you will get there
in half an hour!”

When I reached the actual juncture of the Rhine and the Moselle,
however, I found I was mistaken; I was entertained at first by a fine
view of the two rivers, darkly walled by hills and a very massive and,
in a way, impressive equestrian statue of Emperor William I, armed in
the most flamboyant and aggressive military manner and looking sternly
down on the fast-traveling and uniting waters of the two rivers. Idling
about the base of this monument, to catch sightseers, was a young
picture-post-card seller with a box of views of the Rhine, Coblenz,
Cologne and other cities, for sale. He was a very humble-looking
youth,--a bit doleful,--who kept following me about until I bought
some post-cards. “Where is Mayen?” I asked, as I began to select a few
pictures of things I had and had not seen, for future reference.

“Mayence?” he asked doubtfully. “Mayence? Oh, that is a great way from
here. Mayence is up the river near Frankfort.”

“No, no,” I replied irritably. (This matter was getting to be a sore
point with me.) “I have just come from Mayence. I am looking for Mayen.
Isn’t it over there somewhere?” I pointed to the fields over the river.

He shook his head. “Mayen!” he said. “I don’t think there is such a
place.”

“Good heavens!” I exclaimed, “what are you talking about? Here it is
on the map. What is that? Do you live here in Coblenz?”

“Gewiss!” he replied. “I live here.”

“Very good, then. Where is Mayen?”

“I have never heard of it,” he replied.

“My God!” I exclaimed to myself, “perhaps it was destroyed in the
Franco-Prussian War. Maybe there isn’t any Mayen.”

“You have lived here all your life,” I said, turning to my informant,
“and you have never heard of Mayen?”

“Mayen, no. Mayence, yes. It is up the river near Frankfort.”

“Don’t tell me that again!” I said peevishly, and walked off. The
elusiveness of my father’s birthplace was getting on my nerves. Finally
I found a car-line which ended at the river and a landing wharf and
hailed the conductor and motorman who were idling together for a moment.

“Where is Mayen?” I asked.

“Mayence?” they said, looking at me curiously.

“No, no. M-a-y-e-n, Mayen--not Mayence. It’s a small town around here
somewhere.”

“Mayen! Mayen!” they repeated. “Mayen!” And then frowned.

“Oh, God!” I sighed. I got out my map. “Mayen--see?” I said.

“Oh, yes,” one of them replied brightly, putting up a finger. “That is
so. There _is_ a place called Mayen! It is out that way. You must take
the train.”

“How many miles?” I asked.

“About fifteen. It will take you about an hour and a half.”

I went back to the station and found I must wait another two hours
before my train left. I had reached the point where I didn’t care a
picayune whether I ever got to my father’s town or not. Only a dogged
determination not to be beaten kept me at it.

It was at Coblenz, while waiting for my train, that I had my first real
taste of the German army. Around a corner a full regiment suddenly came
into view. They swung past me and crossed a bridge over the Rhine,
their brass helmets glittering. Their trousers were gray and their
jackets red, and they marched with a slap, slap, slap of their feet
that was positively ominous. Every man’s body was as erect as a poker;
every man’s gun was carried with almost loving grace over his shoulder.
They were all big men, stolid and broad-chested. As they filed over
the bridge, four abreast, they looked, at that distance, like a fine
scarlet ribbon with a streak of gold in it. They eventually disappeared
between the green hills on the other side.

In another part of the city I came upon a company of perhaps fifty,
marching in loose formation and talking cheerfully to one another.
Behind me, coming toward the soldiers, was an officer, one of those
band-box gentlemen in the long gray, military coat of the Germans,
the high-crowned, low-visored cap, and lacquered boots. I learned
before I was out of Germany to listen for the clank of their swords.
The moment the sergeant in charge of the men saw this officer in the
distance, he gave vent to a low command which brought the men four by
four instantly. In the next breath their guns, previously swinging
loosely in their hands, were over their shoulders and as the officer
drew alongside a sharp “_Vorwärts!_” produced that wonderful jack-knife
motion “the goose-step”--each leg brought rigidly to a level with the
abdomen as they went slap--slap--slapping by, until the officer was
gone. Then, at a word, they fell into their old easy formation again
and were human beings once more.

It was to me a most vivid glimpse of extreme military efficiency.
All the while I was in Germany I never saw a lounging soldier. The
officers, all men of fine stature, were so showily tailored as to
leave a sharp impression. They walked briskly, smartly, defiantly,
with a tremendous air of assurance but not of vain-glory. They were so
superior to anything else in Germany that for me they made it. But to
continue.

At half-past two my train departed and I entered a fourth-class
compartment--the only class one could book for on this branch road.
They were hard, wooden-seated little cars, as stiff and heavy as cars
could possibly be. My mind was full of my father’s ancestral heath
and the quaint type of life that must have been lived here a hundred
years before. This was a French border country. My father, when he
ran away, had escaped into Alsace, near by. He told me once of being
whipped for stealing cherries, because his father’s house adjoined the
priest’s yard and a cherry-tree belonging to that holy man had spread
its branches, cherry-laden, over the walls, and he had secretly feasted
upon the fruit at night. His stepmother, informed by the priest,
whipped him. I wondered if I could find that stone wall.

The train was now running through a very typical section of old-time
Germany. Solid, healthy men and buxom women got leisurely on and off at
the various small but well-built stations. You could feel distinctly
a strong note of commercial development here. Some small new factory
buildings were visible at one place and another. An occasional
real-estate sign, after the American fashion, was in evidence. The
fields looked well and fully tilled. Hills were always in the distance
somewhere.

As the train pulled into one small station, Metternich by name, I saw
a tall, raw-boned yokel, lounging on the platform. He was a mere boy,
nineteen or twenty, six feet tall, broad-shouldered, horny-handed, and
with as vacuous a face as it is possible for an individual to possess.
A cheap, wide-brimmed, soft hat, offensively new, and of a dusty mud
color, sat low over one ear; and around it, to my astonishment, was
twined a slim garland of flowers and leaves which, interwoven and
chained, hung ridiculously down his back. He was all alone, gazing
sheepishly about him and yet doing his best to wear his astounding
honors with an air of bravado. I was looking at his collarless shirt,
his big feet and hands and his bow legs, when I heard a German in the
next seat remark to his neighbor, “He won’t look like that long.”

“Three months--he’ll be fine.”

They went on reading their papers and I fell to wondering what they
could mean.

At the next station were five more yokels, all similarly crowned,
and around them a bevy of rosy, healthy village girls. These five,
constituting at once a crowd and a center of attention, were somewhat
more assured--more swaggering--than the lone youth we had seen.

“What is that?” I asked the man over the seat. “What are they doing?”

“They’ve been drawn for the army,” he replied. “All over Germany the
young men are being drawn like this.”

“Do they begin to serve at once?”

“At once.”

I paused in amazement at this trick of statecraft which could make of
the drawing for so difficult and compulsory a thing as service in the
army a gala occasion. For scarcely any compensation--a few cents a
day--these yokels and village men are seized upon and made to do almost
heroic duty for two years, whether they will or no. I did not know
then, quite, how intensely proud Germany is of her army, how perfectly
willing the vast majority are to serve, how certain the great majority
of Germans are that Germany is called of God to rule--_beherrschen_
is their vigorous word--the world. Before I was out of Frankfort and
Berlin, I could well realize how intensely proud the average boy is to
be drawn. He is really a man then; he is permitted to wear a uniform
and carry a gun; the citizens from then on, at least so long as he is
in service, respect him as a soldier. By good fortune or ability he
may become a petty officer. So they crown him with flowers, and the
girls gather round him in admiring groups. What a clever custom thus to
sugar-coat the compulsory pill. And, in a way, what a travesty.

The climax of my quest was reached when, after traveling all this
distance and finally reaching the “Mayen” on the railroad, I didn’t
really reach it after all! It proved to be “West Mayen”--a new section
of the old town--or rather a new rival of it--and from West Mayen I
had to walk to Mayen proper, or what might now be called East Mayen--a
distance of over a mile. I first shook my head in disgust, and then
laughed. For there, in the valley below me, after I had walked a little
way, I could actually see the town my father had described, a small
walled city of now perhaps seven or eight thousand population, with
an old Gothic church in the center containing a twisted spire, a true
castle or _Schloss_ of ancient date, on the high ground to the right, a
towered gate or two, of that medieval conical aspect so beloved of the
painters of romance, and a cluster or clutter of quaint, many-gabled,
sharp-roofed and sharp-pointed houses which speak invariably of days
and nations and emotions and tastes now almost entirely superseded.
West Mayen was being built in modern style. Some coal mines had been
discovered there and manufactories were coming in. At Mayen all was
quite as my father left it. I am sure, some seventy years before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those who think this world would be best if we could have peace and
quiet, should visit Mayen. Here is a town that has existed in a more or
less peaceful state for all of six hundred years. The single Catholic
church, the largest structure outside of the adjacent castle, was
begun in the twelfth century. Frankish princes and Teuton lords have
by turns occupied its site. But Mayen has remained quite peacefully
a small, German, walled city, doing--in part at least--many of the
things its ancestors did. Nowhere in Europe, not even in Italy, did I
feel more keenly the seeming out-of-placeness of the modern implements
of progress. When, after a pause at the local graveyard, in search of
ancestral Dreisers, I wandered down into the town proper, crossed over
the ancient stone bridge that gives into an easily defended, towered
gate, and saw the presence of such things as the Singer Sewing Machine
Company, a thoroughly up-to-date bookstore, an evening newspaper office
and a moving-picture show, I shook my head in real despair. “Nothing is
really old” I sighed, “nothing!”

Like all the places that were highly individual and different, Mayen
made a deep impression on me. It was like entering the shell of
some great mollusc that had long since died, to enter this walled
town and find it occupied by another type of life from that which
originally existed there. Because it was raining now and soon to grow
dark, I sauntered into the first shelter I saw--a four-story, rather
presentable brick inn, located outside the gate known as the Brückentor
(bridge-gate) and took a room here for the night. It was a dull
affair, run by as absurd a creature as I have ever encountered. He was
a little man, sandy-haired, wool-witted, inquisitive, idle, in a silly
way drunken, who was so astonished by the onslaught of a total stranger
in this unexpected manner that he scarcely knew how to conduct himself.

“I want a room for the night,” I suggested.

“A room?” he queried, in an astonished way, as if this were the most
unheard-of thing imaginable.

“Certainly,” I said. “A room. You rent rooms, don’t you?”

“Oh, certainly, certainly. To be sure. A room. Certainly. Wait. I will
call my wife.”

He went into a back chamber, leaving me to face several curious natives
who went over me from head to toe with their eyes.

“Mah-ree-ah!” I heard my landlord calling quite loudly in the rear
portion of the house. “There is one here who wants a room. Have we a
room ready?”

I heard no reply.

Presently he came back, however, and said in a high-flown, deliberate
way, “Be seated. Are you from Frankfort?”

“Yes, and no. I come from America.”

“O-o-oh! America. What part of America?”

“New York.”

“O-o-oh--New York. That is a great place. I have a brother in America.
Since six years now he is out there. I forget the place.” He put his
hand to his foolish, frizzled head and looked at the floor.

His wife now appeared, a stout, dull woman, one of the hard-working
potato specimens of the race. A whispered conference between them
followed, after which they announced my room would soon be ready.

“Let me leave my bag here,” I said, anxious to escape, “and then I
will come back later. I want to look around for awhile.”

He accepted this valid excuse and I departed, glad to get out into the
rain and the strange town, anxious to find a better-looking place to
eat and to see what I could see.

My search for dead or living Dreisers, which I have purposely skipped
in order to introduce the town, led me first, as I have said, to the
local graveyard--the old “Kirchhof.” It was lowering to a rain as I
entered, and the clouds hung in rich black masses over the valley
below. It was half-after four by my watch. I made up my mind that
I would examine the inscription of every tombstone as quickly as
possible, in order to locate all the dead Dreisers, and then get down
into the town before the night and the rain fell, and locate the live
ones--if any. With that idea in view I began at an upper row, near the
church, to work down. Time was when the mere wandering in a graveyard
after this fashion would have produced the profoundest melancholy in
me. It was so in Paris; it made me morbidly weary and ineffably sad.
I saw too many great names--Chopin, Balzac, Daudet, Rachel--solemnly
chiseled in stone. And I hurried out, finally, quite agonized and
unspeakably lonely.

Here in Mayen it was a simpler feeling that was gradually coming over
me--an amused sentimental interest in the simple lives that had had,
too often, their beginning and their end in this little village. It
was a lovely afternoon for such a search. Spring was already here in
South Germany, that faint, tentative suggestion of budding life; all
the wind-blown leaves of the preceding fall were on the ground, but in
between them new grass was springing and, one might readily suspect,
windflowers and crocuses, the first faint green points of lilies and
the pulsing tendrils of harebells. It was beginning to sprinkle, the
faintest suggestion of a light rain; and in the west, over the roofs
and towers of Mayen, a gleam of sunlight broke through the mass of
heavy clouds and touched the valley with one last lingering ray.

“_Hier ruht im Gott_” (Here rests in God), or “_Hier sanft ruht_” (Here
softly rests), was too often the beginning. I had made my way through
the sixth or seventh row from the top, pushing away grass at times from
in front of faded inscriptions, rubbing other lichen-covered letters
clean with a stick and standing interested before recent tombstones.
All smart with a very recently developed local idea of setting a black
piece of glass into the gray of the marble and on that lettering the
names of the departed in gold! It was to me a very thick-witted, truly
Teutonic idea, dull and heavy in its mistakes but certainly it was
no worse than the Italian idea of putting the photograph of the late
beloved in the head of the slab, behind glass in a stone-cut frame and
of further ornamenting the graves with ghastly iron-shafted lamps with
globes of yellow, pink and green glass. That was the worst of all.

As I was meditating how, oysterlike, little villages reproduce
themselves from generation to generation, a few coming and a few going
but the majority leading a narrow simple round of existence. I came
suddenly, so it seemed to me, upon one grave which gave me a real
shock. It was a comparatively recent slab of gray granite with the
modern plate of black glass set in it and a Gothic cross surmounting it
all at the top. On the glass plate was lettered:

                              Here Rests
                           Theodor Dreiser,
                          Born 16--Feb--1820.
                          Died 28--Feb--1882.
                               R. I. P.

I think as clear a notion as I ever had of how my grave will look after
I am gone and how utterly unimportant both life and death are, anyhow,
came to me then. Something about this old graveyard, the suggestion of
the new life of spring, a robin trilling its customary evening song
on a near-by twig, the smoke curling upward from the chimneys in the
old houses below, the spire of the medieval church and the walls of
the medieval castle standing out in the softening light--one or all of
them served to give me a sense of the long past that is back of every
individual in the race of life and the long future that the race has
before it, regardless of the individual. Religion offers no consolation
to me. Psychic research and metaphysics, however meditated upon, are
in vain. There is in my judgment no death; the universe is composed
of life; but, nevertheless, I cannot see any continuous life for any
individual. And it would be so unimportant if true. Imagine an eternity
of life for a leaf, a fish-worm, an oyster! The best that can be said
is that ideas of types survive somewhere in the creative consciousness.
That is all. The rest is silence.

Besides this, there were the graves of my father’s brother John, and
some other Dreisers; but none of them dated earlier than 1800.




CHAPTER XLV

MY FATHER’S BIRTHPLACE


It was quite dark when I finally came across a sort of tap-room
“restaurant” whose quaint atmosphere charmed me. The usual pewter
plates and tankards adorned the dull red and brown walls. A line of
leather-covered seats followed the walls, in front of which were ranged
long tables.

My arrival here with a quiet request for food put a sort of panic into
the breast of my small but stout host, who, when I came in, was playing
checkers with another middle-aged Mayener, but who, when I asked for
food, gave over his pleasure for the time being and bustled out to find
his wife. He looked not a little like a fat sparrow.

“Why, yes, yes,” he remarked briskly, “what will you have?”

“What _can_ I have?”

On the instant he put his little fat hand to his semi-bald pate and
rubbed it ruminatively. “A steak, perhaps. Some veal? Some sausage?”

“I will have a steak, if you don’t mind and a cup of black coffee.”

He bustled out and when he came back I threw a new bomb into camp. “May
I wash my hands?”

“Certainly, certainly,” he replied, “in a minute.” And he bounded
upstairs. “Katrina! Katrina! Katrina!” I heard him call, “have Anna
make the washroom ready. He wishes to wash his hands. Where are the
towels? Where is the soap?”

There was much clattering of feet overhead. I heard a door being opened
and things being moved. Presently I heard him call, “Katrina, in God’s
name, where is the soap!” More clattering of feet, and finally he came
down, red and puffing. “Now, mein Herr, you can go up.”

I went, concealing a secret grin, and found that I had dislocated
a store-room, once a bath perhaps; that a baby-carriage had been
removed from a table and on it pitcher, bowl, towel, and soap had been
placed--a small piece of soap and cold water. Finally, after seeing
me served properly, he sat down at his table again and sighed. The
neighbor returned. Several more citizens dropped in to read and chat.
The two youngest boys in the family came downstairs with their books to
study. It was quite a typical German family scene.

It was here that I made my first effort to learn something about
the Dreiser family. “Do you know any one by the name of Dreiser,
hereabouts?” I asked cautiously, afraid to talk too much for fear of
incriminating myself.

“Dreiser, Dreiser?” he said. “Is he in the furniture business?”

“I don’t know. That is what I should like to find out. Do you know of
any one by that name?”

“Is not that the man, Henry,”--he turned to one of his guests--“who
failed here last year for fifty thousand marks?”

“The same,” said this other, solemnly (I fancied rather feelingly).

“Goodness, gracious!” I thought. “This is the end. If he failed for
fifty thousand marks in Germany he is in disgrace. To think a Dreiser
should ever have had fifty thousand marks! Would that I had known him
in his palmy days.”

“There was a John Dreiser here,” my host said to me, “who failed for
fifty thousand marks. He is gone though, now I think. I don’t know
where he is.”

It was not an auspicious beginning, and under the circumstances I
thought it as well not to identify myself with this Dreiser too
closely. I finished my meal and went out, wondering how, if at all, I
was to secure any additional information. The rain had ceased and the
sky was already clearing. It promised to be fine on the morrow. After
more idle rambling through a world that was quite as old as Canterbury
I came back finally to my hotel. My host was up and waiting for me. All
but one guest had gone.

“So you are from America,” he observed. “I would like very much to talk
with you some more.”

“Let me ask _you_ something,” I replied. “Do you know any one here in
Mayen by the name of Dreiser?”

“Dreiser--Dreiser? It seems to me there was some one here. He failed
for a lot of money. You could find out at the _Mayener Zeitung_. Mr.
Schroeder ought to know.”

I decided that I would appeal to Mr. Schroeder and his paper in the
morning; and pretending to be very tired, in order to escape my
host, who by now was a little tipsy. I went to the room assigned me,
carrying a candle. That night I slept soundly, under an immense, stuffy
feather-bed.

The next morning at dawn I arose and was rewarded with the only truly
satisfying medieval prospect I have ever seen in my life. It was
strange, remote, Teutonic, Burgundian. The “grafs” and “burghers”
of an older world might well have been enacting their life under my
very eyes. Below me in a valley was Mayen,--its quaint towers and
housetops spread out in the faint morning light. It was beautiful.
Under my window tumbled the little stream that had served as a moat
in earlier days--a good and natural defense. Opposite me was the
massive Brückentor. Further on was a heavy circular sweep of wall
and a handsome watch-tower. Over the wall, rising up a slope, could
be seen the peak-roofed, gabled houses, of solid brick and stone with
slate and tile roofs. Never before in my life had I looked on a truly
medieval city of the castellated, Teutonic order. Nothing that I had
seen in either France, England, or Italy had the peculiar quality of
this remote spot. I escaped the opportunities of my talkative host by
a ruse, putting the two marks charged for the room in an envelope and
leaving it on the dresser. I went out and followed the stream in the
pleasant morning light. I mailed post-cards at the local post-office
to all and sundry of my relatives, stating the local condition of the
Dreisers, as so far learned, and then sought out the office of the
_Mayener Zeitung_, where I encountered one Herr Schroeder, but he
could tell me nothing of any Dreisers save of that unfortunate one
who had failed in the furniture business. He advised me to seek the
curator of the local museum, a man who had the history of Mayen at his
finger-tips. He was a cabinet-maker by trade. I could not find him at
home and finally, after looking in the small local directory published
by Mr. Schroeder and finding no Dreisers listed, I decided to give up
and go back to Frankfort; but not without one last look at the private
yard attached to the priest’s house and the cherry-tree which had been
the cause of the trouncing, and lastly the local museum.

It is curious how the most innocent and idle of sentiments will lead a
person on in this way. In the little Brückentor Museum, before leaving,
I studied with the greatest interest--because it was my father’s
town--the ancient Celtic, Teutonic, Roman and Merovingian antiquities.
It was here that I saw for the first time the much-talked-of wheat
discovered in a Celtic funeral urn, which, although thousands of years
have elapsed since it was harvested, is still--thanks to dryness, so
the local savant assured me--fertile, and if planted would grow! Talk
of suspended animation!

Below the town I lingered in the little valley of the Moselle, now laid
out as a park, and reëxamined the gate through which my father had been
wont to ride. I think I sentimentalized a little over the long distance
that had separated my father from his old home and how he must have
longed to see it at times, and then finally, after walking about the
church and school where he had been forced to go, I left Mayen with a
sorrowful backward glance. For in spite of the fact that there was now
no one there to whom I could count myself related, still it was from
here that my ancestors had come. I had found at least the church that
my father had attended, the priest’s house and garden where possibly
the identical cherry-tree was still standing--there were several. I
had seen the gate through which my father had ridden as a boy with the
soldiers and from which he had walked finally, never to return any
more. That was enough. I shall always be glad I went to Mayen.




CHAPTER XLVI

THE ARTISTIC TEMPERAMENT


Before leaving Frankfort I hurried to Cook’s office to look after my
mail. I found awaiting me a special delivery letter from a friend of
Barfleur’s, a certain famous pianist, Madame A., whom I had met in
London. She had told me then that she was giving a recital at Munich
and Leipzig and that she was coming to Frankfort about this very time.
She was scheduled to play on Wednesday, and this was Monday. She was
anxious to see me. There was a long account of the town outside Berlin
where she resided, her house, its management by a capable housekeeper,
etc. Would I go there? I could have her room. If I did, would I wait
until she could come back at the latter end of the month? It was a
most hospitable letter, and, coming from such a busy woman, a most
flattering one and evidently instigated by Barfleur. I debated whether
to accept this charming invitation as I strolled about Frankfort.

At one corner of the shopping district I came upon a music store in
the window of which were displayed a number of photographs of musical
celebrities. A little to my surprise I noticed that the central place
was occupied by a large photograph of Madame A. in her most attractive
pose. A near-by bill-board contained full announcement of her coming.
I meditated somewhat more mellowly after this and finally returned to
Cook’s to leave a telegram. I would wait, I said, here at Frankfort
until Wednesday.

In due time Madame A. arrived and her recital, as such things go, was
a brilliant success. So far as I could judge, she had an enthusiastic
following in Frankfort, quite as significant, for instance, as a
woman like Carreno would have in America. An institution known as
the Saalbau, containing a large auditorium, was crowded, and there
were flowers in plenty for Madame A. who opened and closed the
program. The latter arrangement resulted in an ovation to her, men and
women crowding about her feet below the platform and suggesting one
composition and another that she might play--selections, obviously,
that they had heard her render before.

She looked forceful, really brilliant, and tender in a lavender silk
gown and wearing a spray of an enormous bouquet of lilacs that I had
sent her.

This business of dancing attendance upon a national musical favorite
was a bit strange for me, although once before in my life it fell to my
lot, and tempestuous business it was, too. The artistic temperament! My
hair rises! Madame A. I knew, after I saw her, was expecting me to do
the unexpected--to give edge as it were to her presence in Frankfort.
And so strolling out before dinner I sought a florist’s, and espying a
whole jardinière full of lilacs, I said to the woman florist, “How much
for all those lilacs?”

“You mean all?” she asked.

“All,” I said.

“Thirty marks,” she replied.

“Isn’t that rather high?” I said, assuming that it was wise to bargain
a little anywhere.

“But this is very early spring,” she said. “These are the very first
we’ve had.”

“Very good,” I said, “but if I should take them all would you put a
nice ribbon on them?”

“O-o-oh!” she hesitated, almost pouting, “ribbon is very dear, my good
sir. Still--if you wish--it will make a wonderful bouquet.”

“Here is my card,” I said, “put that in it.” And then I gave her the
address and the hour. I wrote some little nonsense on the card, about
tender melodies and spring-time, and then I went back to the hotel to
attend Madame.

A more bustling, aggressive little artist you would not want to find.
When I called at eight-thirty--the recital was at nine--I found several
musical satellites dancing attendance upon her. There was one beautiful
little girl from Mayence I noticed, of the Jewish type, who followed
Madame A. with positively adoring glances. There was another woman of
thirty who was also caught in the toils of this woman’s personality and
swept along by her quite as one planet dislocates the orbit of another
and makes it into a satellite. She had come all the way from Berlin.
“Oh, Madame A.,” she confided to me upon introduction, “oh, wonderful!
wonderful! Such playing! It is the most wonderful thing in the world to
me.”

This woman had an attractive face, sallow and hollow, with burning
black eyes and rich black hair. Her body was long and thin, supple and
graceful. She followed Madame A. too, with those strange, questioning
eyes. Life is surely pathetic. It was interesting, though, to be in
this atmosphere of intense artistic enthusiasm.

When the last touch had been added to Madame’s coiffure, a sprig of
blossom of some kind inserted in her corsage, a flowing opera cloak
thrown about the shoulders, she was finally ready. So busy was she,
suggesting this and that to one and another of her attendants, that
she scarcely saw me. “Oh, there you are,” she beamed finally. “Now, I
am _quite_ ready. Is the machine here, Marie? Oh, very good. And Herr
Steiger! O-o-oh!” This last to a well-known violinist who had arrived.

It turned out that there were two machines--one for the satellites and
Herr Steiger who was also to play this evening, and one for Madame A.,
her maid and myself. We finally debouched from the hall and elevator
and fussy lobby, where German officers were strolling to and fro, into
the machines and were away. Madame A. was lost in a haze of artistic
contemplation with thoughts, no doubt, as to her program and her
success. “Now maybe you will like my program better,” she suggested
after a while. “In London it was not so goot. I haf to feel my audience
iss--how do you say?--vith me. In Berlin and here and Dresden and
Leipzig they like me. In England they do not know me.” She sighed and
looked out of the window. “Are you happy to be with me?” she asked
naïvely.

“Quite,” I replied.

When we reached the auditorium we were ushered by winding passages into
a very large green-room, a salon, as it were, where the various artists
awaited their call to appear. It was already occupied by a half-dozen
persons, or more, the friends of Madame A., the local manager, his hair
brushed aloft like a cockatoo, several musicians, the violinist Herr
Steiger, Godowsky the pianist, and one or two others. They all greeted
Madame A. effusively.

There was some conversation in French here and there, and now and
then in English. The room was fairly babbling with temperament.
It is always amusing to hear a group of artists talk. They
are so fickle, make-believe, innocently treacherous, jealous,
vainglorious, flattering. “Oh, yes--how splendid he was. That aria
in C Major--perfect! But you know I did not care so much for his
rendering of the Pastoral Symphony--very weak in the _allegro ma non
troppo_--very. He should not attempt that. It is not in his vein--not
the thing he does best”--fingers lifted very suggestively and warningly
in the air.

Some artist and his wife did not agree (very surprising); the gentleman
was the weaker instrument in this case.

“Oh!”--it was Madame A. talking, “now that is too-oo ridiculous. She
must go places and he must go along as manager! Herr Spink wrote me
from Hamburg that he would not have him around. She has told him that
he affects her playing. Still he goes! It is too-oo much. They will not
live together long.”

“Where is Herr Schochman?” (This being incident number three.) “Isn’t
he leading to-night? But they promised me! No, I will not play then!
It is always the way. I know him well! I know why he does it! It is to
annoy me. He doesn’t like me and he disappoints me.”

Great business of soothing the principal performer of the evening--the
manager explaining volubly, friends offering soothing comment. More
talk about other artists, their wives, flirtations, successes, failures.

In the midst of this, by some miscalculation (they were to have been
delivered over the footlights after the end of Madame A.’s first
number) in came my flowers. They looked like a fair-sized bush being
introduced.

“Oh!” exclaimed Madame A. when the card was examined and they were
offered to her, “how heavenly. Good heavens! it is a whole tree.
Oh--wonderful, wonderful! And these be-yutiful words! O-o-oh!”

More coquettish glances and tender sighs. I could have choked with
amusement. It was all such delicious by-play--quite the thing that
artists expect and must have. She threw away the sprig of jasmine she
wore and drawing out a few sprigs of the lilac wore those instead.
“Now I can play,” she exclaimed.

Deep breathings, sighs, ecstatic expressions.

Her turn came and, as I expected after hearing her in London, I heard
delicious music. She had her following. They applauded her to the
echo. Her two female satellites sat with me, and little Miss Meyer of
Mayence--as I will call her--fairly groaned with happiness at times.
Truly Madame A. was good to look upon, quite queenly, very assured.
At the end of it all a fifteen- or twenty-minute ovation. It was
beautiful, truly.

While we were in the green-room talking between sections of the program
and intermediate soloists, I said to her, “You are coming with me to
supper, of course.”

“Of course! What else did you expect?”

“Are there any other restaurants besides those of the Frankforter Hof?”

“I think not.”

“How will you get rid of your friends after the performance?”

“Oh, I shall send them away. You take a table anywhere you like and I
will come. Make it twelve o’clock.”

We were bundled back to the hotel, flowers, wraps, maid, satellites,
and I went to see about the supper. In fifteen minutes it was ready;
and in twenty minutes more Madame A. came, quite rosy, all awake
temperamentally, inquisitive, defensive, coquettish, eager. We are all
greedy animals at best--the finer the greedier. The whole world is
looking to see what life will give it to eat--from ideas, emotions,
enthusiasms down to grass and potatoes. We are organized appetites,
magnificent, dramatic, pathetic at times, but appetites just the
same. The greater the appetite the more magnificent the spectacle.
Satiety is deadly discouraging. The human stomach is the grand
central organ--life in all its amazing, subtle, heavenly, pathetic
ramifications has been built up around that. The most pathetic thing
in life is a hungry man; the most stirringly disturbing thing, a
triumphant, greedy one. Madame A. sat down to our cold chicken, salad,
champagne, and coffee with beaming birdlike eyes.

“Oh, it is so good to see you again!” she declared; but her eyes were
on the chicken. “I was so afraid when I wrote you from Munich that you
would not get my letter. I can’t tell you how you appeal to me; we have
only met twice, yet you see we are quite old friends already!”

Just as her none too subtle flattery was beginning to work, she
remarked casually, “Do you know Mr. Barfleur well?”

“Oh, fairly well. Yes, I know a little something about him.”

“You like him, don’t you?”

“I am very fond of him,” I answered, my vanity deflating rapidly.

“He is so fond of you,” she assured me. “Oh, he admires you so much.
What you think must have considerable weight with him, eh? Where did
you first meet him?” she asked.

“In New York.”

“Now, between us: he is one of the few men in the world I deeply care
for--but I don’t think he cares for me.”

“Good Lord!” I said to myself wearily, “why is it that all the charming
ladies I meet either are or have been in love with Barfleur. It’s
getting monotonous!” But I had to smile.

“You will visit me in Berlin?” she was saying. “I will be back by the
twenty-sixth. Can’t you wait that long? Berlin is so interesting. When
I come, we shall have such nice talks!”

“Yes--about Barfleur!” I thought to myself. Aloud I said vaguely, “It
is charming of you; I will stop over to see you, if I possibly can.”
Then I said good night and left.




CHAPTER XLVII

BERLIN


Berlin, when I reached it, first manifested itself in a driving rain.
If I laugh at it forever and ever as a blunder-headed, vainglorious,
self-appreciative city I shall always love it too. Paris has had its
day, and will no doubt have others; London is content with an endless,
conservative day; Berlin’s is still to come and come brilliantly.
The blood is there, and the hope, and the moody, lustful, Wagnerian
temperament.

But first, before I reached it, I suffered a strange mental revolt
at being in Germany at all. Why? I can scarcely say. Perhaps I was
beginning to be depressed with what in my prejudice I called the
dullness of Germany. A little while later I recognized that while
there is an extreme conflict of temperament between the average German
and myself, I could yet admire them without wishing to be anything
like them. Of all the peoples I saw I should place the Germans first
for sobriety, industry, thoroughness, a hearty intolerance of sham, a
desire and a willingness to make the best of a very difficult earthly
condition. In many respects they are not artistically appetizing, being
gross physically, heartily passionate, vain, and cocksure; but those
things after all are unimportant. They have, in spite of all their
defects, great emotional, intellectual, and physical capacities, and
these things _are_ important. I think it is unquestionable that in
the main they take life far too seriously. The belief in a hell, for
instance, took a tremendous grip on the Teutonic mind and the Lutheran
interpretation of Protestantism, as it finally worked out, was as
dreary as anything could be--almost as dreary as Presbyterianism in
Scotland. That is the sad German temperament. A great nationality,
business success, public distinction is probably tending to make over
or at least modify the Teutonic cast of thought which is gray; but in
parts of Germany, for instance at Mayence, you see the older spirit
almost in full force.

In the next place I was out of Italy and that land had taken such a
strange hold on me. What a far cry from Italy to Germany! I thought.
Gone; once and for all, the wonderful clarity of atmosphere that
pervades almost the whole of Italy from the Alps to Rome and I presume
Sicily. Gone the obvious _dolce far niente_, the lovely cities set on
hills, the castles, the fortresses, the strange stone bridges, the
hot, white roads winding like snowy ribbons in the distance. No olive
trees, no cypresses, no umbrella trees or ilexes, no white, yellow,
blue, brown and sea-green houses, no wooden plows, white oxen and
ambling, bare-footed friars. In its place (the Alps and Switzerland
between) this low rich land, its railroads threading it like steel
bands, its citizens standing up as though at command, its houses in
the smaller towns almost uniformly red, its architecture a twentieth
century modification of an older order of many-gabled roofs--the order
of Albrecht Dürer--with its fanciful decorations, conical roofs and
pinnacles and quaint windows and doors that suggest the bird-boxes of
our childhood. Germany appears in a way to have attempted to abandon
the medieval architectural ideal that still may be seen in Mayence,
Mayen, the heart of Frankfort, Nuremberg, Heidelberg and other places
and to adapt its mood to the modern theory of how buildings ought to
be constructed, but it has not quite done so. The German scroll-loving
mind of the Middle Ages is still the German scroll-loving mind of
to-day. Look and you will see it quaintly cropping out everywhere. Not
in those wonderful details of intricacy, Teutonic fussiness, naïve,
jester-like grotesqueness which makes the older sections of so many old
German cities so wonderful, but in a slight suggestion of them here
and there--a quirk of roof, an over-elaborateness of decoration, a
too protuberant frieze or grape-viney, Bacchus-mooded, sex-ornamented
panel, until you say to yourself quite wisely, “Ah, Teutons will be
Teutons still.” They are making a very different Germany from what the
old Germany was--modern Germany dating from 1871--but it is not an
entirely different Germany. Its citizens are still stocky, red-blooded,
physically excited and excitable, emotional, mercurial, morbid,
enthusiastic, women-loving and life-loving, and no doubt will be so,
praise God, until German soil loses its inherent essentials, and German
climate makes for some other variations not yet indicated in the race.

[Illustration: A German dance hall, Berlin]

But to return to Berlin. I saw it first jogging down Unter den Linden
from the Friedrichstrasse Bahnhof (station) to Cook’s Berlin agency,
seated comfortably in a closed cab behind as fat a horse and driver
as one would wish to see. And from there, still farther along Unter
den Linden and through the Wilhelmstrasse to Leipzigstrasse and the
Potsdamer Bahnhof I saw more of it. Oh, the rich guttural value of the
German “platzes” and “strasses” and “ufers” and “dams.” They make up
a considerable portion of your city atmosphere for you in Berlin. You
just have to get used to them--just as you have to accept the “fabriks”
and the “restaurations” and the “wein handlungs,” and all the other
“ichs,” “lings,” “bergs,” “brückes,” until you sigh for the French
and Italian “-rics” and the English-American “-rys.” However, among
the first things that impressed me were these: all Berlin streets,
seemingly, were wide with buildings rarely more than five stories
high. Everything, literally _everything_, was American new--and
newer--German new! And the cabbies were the largest, fattest, most
broad-backed, most thick-through and _Deutschiest_ looking creatures I
have ever beheld. Oh, the marvel of those glazed German cabby hats with
the little hard rubber decorations on the side. Nowhere else in Europe
is there anything like these cabbies. They do not stand; they sit,
heavily and spaciously--alone.

The faithful Baedeker has little to say for Berlin. Art? It is
almost all in the Kaiser-Friedrich-Museum, in the vicinity of the
Kupferdam. And as for public institutions, spots of great historic
interest--they are a dreary and negligible list. But, nevertheless and
notwithstanding, Berlin appealed to me instantly as one of the most
interesting and forceful of all the cities, and that solely because it
is new, crude, human, growing feverishly, unbelievably; and growing in
a distinct and individual way. They have achieved and are achieving
something totally distinct and worth while--a new place to go; and
after a while, I haven’t the slightest doubt, thousands and even
hundreds of thousands of travelers will go there. But for many and many
a day the sensitive and artistically inclined will not admire it.

My visit to Cook’s brought me a mass of delayed mail which cheered
me greatly. It was now raining pitchforks but my bovine driver, who
looked somehow like a segment of a wall, managed to bestow my trunk
and bags in such a fashion that they were kept dry, and off we went
for the hotel. I had a preconceived notion that Unter den Linden
was a magnificent avenue lined shadily with trees and crowded with
palaces. Nothing could have been more erroneous. The trees are few and
insignificant, the palaces entirely wanting. It is a very wide business
street, lined with hotels, shops, restaurants, newspaper offices and
filled with a parading throng in pleasant weather. At one end it
gives into an area known as the Lustgarten crowded with palaces, art
galleries, the Berlin Cathedral, the Imperial Opera House and what
not; at the other end (it is only about a mile long) into the famous
Berlin Thiergarten, formerly a part of the Imperial (Hohenzollern)
hunting-forest. On the whole, the avenue was a disappointment.

For suggestions of character, individuality, innate Teutonic charm or
the reverse--as these things strike one--growth, prosperity, promise,
and the like, Berlin cannot be equaled in Europe. Quite readily I can
see how it might irritate and repel the less aggressive denizens of
less hopeful and determined realms. The German, when he is oppressed
is terribly depressed; when he is in the saddle, nothing can equal his
bump of I-am-ity. It becomes so balloon-like and astounding that the
world may only gaze in astonishment or retreat in anger, dismay, or
uproarious amusement. The present-day Germans do take themselves so
seriously and from many points of view with good reason, too.

I don’t know where in Europe, outside of Paris, if even there, you will
see a better-kept city. It is so clean and spruce and fresh that it is
a joy to walk there--anywhere. Mile after mile of straight, imposing
streets greet your gaze. Berlin needs a great Pantheon, an avenue
such as Unter den Linden lined with official palaces (not shops), and
unquestionably a magnificent museum of art--I mean a better building.
Its present public and imperial structures are most uninspired. They
suggest the American-European architecture of 1860–1870. The public
monuments of Berlin, and particularly their sculptural adornments are
for the most part a crime against humanity.

I remember standing and looking one evening at that noble German
effort known as the memorial statue of William I, in the Lustgarten,
unquestionably the fiercest and most imposing of all the Berlin
military sculptures. This statue speaks loudly for all Berlin and for
all Germany and for just what the Teutonic disposition would like to
be--namely, terrible, colossal, astounding, world-scarifying, and the
like. It almost shouts “Ho! see what I am,” but the sad part of it is
that it does it badly, not with that reserve that somehow invariably
indicates tremendous power so much better than mere bluster does. What
the Germans seem not to have learned in their art at least is that
“easy does it.” Their art is anything but easy. It is almost invariably
showy, truculent, vainglorious. But to continue: The whole neighborhood
in which this statue occurs, and the other neighborhood at the other
end of Unter den Linden, where stands the Reichstag and the like,
all in the center of Berlin, as it were, is conceived, designed, and
executed (in my judgment) in the same mistaken spirit. Truly, when you
look about you at the cathedral (save the mark) or the Royal Palace in
the Lustgarten, or at the Winged Victory before the Reichstag or at the
Reichstag itself, and the statue of Bismarck in the Königs-Platz (the
two great imperial centers), you sigh for the artistic spirit of Italy.
But no words can do justice to the folly of spending three million
dollars to erect such a thing as this Berlin _Dom_ or cathedral. It is
so bad that it hurts. And I am told that the Kaiser himself sanctioned
some of the architectural designs. And it was only completed between
1894 and 1906. Shades of Brabante and Pisano!

But if I seem disgusted with this section of Berlin--its evidence
of Empire, as it were--there was much more that truly charmed me.
Wherever I wandered I could perceive through all the pulsing life
of this busy city the thoroughgoing German temperament--its moody
poverty, its phlegmatic middle-class prosperity, its aggressive
commercial, financial, and, above all, its official and imperial life.
Berlin is shot through with the constant suggestion of officialism
and imperialism. The German policeman with his shining brass helmet
and brass belt; the Berlin sentry in his long military gray overcoat,
his musket over his shoulder, his high cap shading his eyes, his
black-and-white striped sentry-box behind him, stationed apparently at
every really important corner and before every official palace; the
German military and imperial automobiles speeding their independent
ways, all traffic cleared away before them, the small flag of
officialdom or imperialism fluttering defiantly from the foot-rails
as they flash at express speed past you;--these things suggest an
individuality which no other European city that I saw quite equaled. It
represented what I would call determination, self-sufficiency, pride.
Berlin is new, green, vigorous, astounding--a city that for speed of
growth puts Chicago entirely into the shade; that for appearance,
cleanliness, order, for military precision and thoroughness has no
counterpart anywhere. It suggests to you all the time, something very
much greater to come which is the most interesting thing that can be
said about any city, anywhere.

One panegyric I should like to write on Berlin concerns not so much
its social organization as a city, though that is interesting enough,
but specifically its traffic and travel arrangements. To be sure it is
not yet such a city as either New York, London or Paris, but it has
over three million people, a crowded business heart and a heavy, daily,
to-and-fro-swinging tide of suburban traffic. There are a number of
railway stations in the great German capital, the Potsdamer Bahnhof,
the Friedrichstrasse Bahnhof, the Anhalter Bahnhof and so on, and
coming from each in the early hours of the morning, or pouring toward
them at evening are the same eager streams of people that one meets in
New York at similar hours.

The Germans are amazingly like the Americans. Sometimes I think that we
get the better portion of our progressive, constructive characteristics
from them. Only, the Germans, I am convinced, are so much more
thorough. They go us one better in economy, energy, endurance, and
thoroughness. The American already is beginning to want to play too
much. The Germans have not reached that stage.

The railway stations I found were excellent, with great switching-yards
and enormous sheds arched with glass and steel, where the trains
waited. In Berlin I admired the suburban train service as much as I
did that of London, if not more. That in Paris was atrocious. Here the
trains offered a choice of first, second, and third class, with the
vast majority using the second and third. I saw little difference in
the crowds occupying either class. The second-class compartments were
upholstered in a greyish-brown corduroy. The third-class seats were of
plain wood, varnished and scrupulously clean. I tried all three classes
and finally fixed on the third as good enough for me.

I wish all Americans who at present suffer the indignities of the
American street-railway and steam-railway suburban service could go to
Berlin and see what that city has to teach them in this respect. Berlin
is much larger than Chicago. It is certain soon to be a city of five or
six millions of people--very soon. The plans for handling this mass of
people comfortably and courteously are already in operation. The German
public service is obviously not left to supposedly kindly minded
business gentlemen--“Christian gentlemen,”--as Mr. Baer of the Reading
once chose to put it, “in partnership with God.” The populace may be
underlings to an imperial Kaiser, subject to conscription and eternal
inspection, but at least the money-making “Christian gentlemen” with
their hearts and souls centered on their private purses and working, as
Mr. Croker once said of himself, “for their own pockets all the time,”
are not allowed to “take it out of” the rank and file.

No doubt the German street-railways and steam-railways are making a
reasonable sum of money and are eager to make more. I haven’t the least
doubt but that heavy, self-opinionated, vainglorious German directors
of great wealth gather around mahogany tables in chambers devoted to
meetings of directors and listen to ways and means of cutting down
expenses and “improving” the service. Beyond the shadow of a doubt
there are hard, hired managers, eager to win the confidence and support
of their superiors and ready to feather their own nests at the expense
of the masses, who would gladly cut down the service, “pack ’em in,”
introduce the “cutting out” system of car service and see that the “car
ahead” idea was worked to the last maddening extreme; but in Germany,
for some strange, amazing reason, they don’t get a chance. What is the
matter with Germany, anyhow? I should like to know. Really I would.
Why isn’t the “Christian gentleman” theory of business introduced
there? The population of Germany, acre for acre and mile for mile, is
much larger than that of America. They have sixty-five million people
crowded into an area as big as Texas. Why don’t they “pack ’em in”? Why
don’t they introduce the American “sardine” subway service? You don’t
find it anywhere in Germany, for some strange reason. Why? They have
a subway service in Berlin. It serves vast masses of people, just as
the subway does in New York; its platforms are crowded with people. But
you can get a seat just the same. There is no vociferated “step lively”
there. Overcrowding isn’t a joke over there as it is here--something
to be endured with a feeble smile until you are spiritually comparable
to a door mat. There must be “Christian gentlemen” of wealth and
refinement in Germany and Berlin. Why don’t they “get on the job”? The
thought arouses strange uncertain feelings in me.

Take, for instance, the simple matter of starting and stopping
street-railway cars in the Berlin business heart. In so far as I could
see, that area, mornings and evenings, was as crowded as any similar
area in Paris, London, or New York. Street-cars have to be run through
it, started, stopped; passengers let on and off--a vast tide carried in
and out of the city. Now the way this matter is worked in New York is
quite ingenious. We operate what might be described as a daily guessing
contest intended to develop the wits, muscles, lungs, and tempers of
the people. The scheme, in so far as the street railway companies are
concerned, is (after running the roads as economically as possible)
to see how thoroughly the people can be fooled in their efforts to
discover when and where a car will stop. In Berlin, however, they
have, for some reason, an entirely different idea. There the idea is
not to fool the people at all but to get them in and out of the city
as quickly as possible. So, as in Paris, London, Rome, and elsewhere,
a plan of fixed stopping-places has been arranged. Signs actually
indicate where the cars stop and there--marvel of marvels--they
all stop even in the so-called rush hours. No traffic policeman,
apparently, can order them to go ahead without stopping. They must
stop. And so the people do not run for the cars, the motorman has no
joy in outwitting anybody. Perhaps that is why the Germans are neither
so agile, quick-witted, or subtle as the Americans.

And then, take in addition--if you will bear with me another
moment--this matter of the Berlin suburban service as illustrated by
the lines to Potsdam and elsewhere. It is true the officers, and even
the Emperor of Germany, living at Potsdam and serving the Imperial
German Government there may occasionally use this line, but thousands
upon thousands of intermediate and plebeian Germans use it also. You
can _always_ get a seat. Please notice this word _always_. There are
three classes and you can _always_ get a seat in any class--not the
first or second classes only, but the third class and particularly the
_third_ class. There are “rush” hours in Berlin just as there are in
New York, dear reader. People swarm into the Berlin railway stations
and at Berlin street-railway corners and crowd on cars just as they
do here. The lines fairly seethe with cars. On the tracks ranged in
the Potsdamer Bahnhof, for instance, during the rush hours, you will
see trains consisting of eleven, twelve, and thirteen cars, mostly
third-class accommodation, waiting to receive you. And when one is
gone, another and an equally large train is there on the adjoining
track and it is going to leave in another minute or two also. And when
that is gone there will be another, and so it goes.

There is not the slightest desire evident anywhere to “pack” anybody
in. There isn’t any evidence that anybody wants to make anything
(dividends, for instance) out of straps. There _are_ no straps. These
poor, unliberated, Kaiser-ruled people would really object to straps
and standing in the aisles, They would compel a decent service and
there would be no loud cries on the part of “Christian gentlemen”
operating large and profitable systems as to the “rights of property,”
the need of “conserving the constitution,” the privilege of appealing
to Federal judges, and the right of having every legal technicality
invoked to the letter;--or, if there were, they would get scant
attention. Germany just doesn’t see public service in that light. It
hasn’t fought, bled, and died, perhaps, for “liberty.” It hasn’t had
George Washington and Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson and Abraham
Lincoln. All it has had is Frederick the Great and Emperor William I
and Bismarck and Von Moltke. Strange, isn’t it? Queer, how Imperialism
apparently teaches people to be civil, while Democracy does the
reverse. We ought to get a little “Imperialism” into our government,
I should say. We ought to make American law and American government
supreme, but over it there ought to be a “supremer” people who really
know what their rights are, who respect liberties, decencies, and
courtesies for themselves and others, and who demand and see that
their government and their law and their servants, public and private,
are responsive and responsible to them, rather than to the “Christian
gentlemen” who want to “pack ’em in.” If you don’t believe it, go to
Berlin and then see if you come home again cheerfully believing that
this is still the land of the _free_ and the home of the _brave_.
Rather I think you will begin to feel that we are getting to be the
land of the _dub_ and the home of the _door-mat_. Nothing more and
nothing less.




CHAPTER XLVIII

THE NIGHT-LIFE OF BERLIN


During the first ten days I saw considerable of German night-life,
in company with Herr A., a stalwart Prussian who went out of his way
to be nice to me. I cannot say that, after Paris and Monte Carlo, I
was greatly impressed, although all that I saw in Berlin had this
advantage, that it bore sharply the imprint of German nationality. The
cafés were not especially noteworthy. I do not know what I can say
about any of them which will indicate their individuality. “Piccadilly”
was a great evening drinking-place near the Potsdamer Platz, which was
all glass, gold, marble, glittering with lights and packed with the
Germans, _en famille_, and young men and their girls.

“La Clou” was radically different. In a way it was an amazing place,
catering to the moderately prosperous middle class. It seated, I should
say, easily fifteen hundred people, if not more, on the ground floor;
and every table, in the evening at least, was full. At either end of
the great center aisle bisecting it was stationed a stringed orchestra
and when one ceased the other immediately began, so that there was
music without interruption. Father and mother and young Lena, the
little Heine, and the two oldest girls or boys were all here. During
the evening, up one aisle and down another, there walked a constant
procession of boys and girls and young men and young women, making shy,
conservative eyes at one another.

In Berlin every one drinks beer or the lighter wines--the children
being present--and no harm seems to come from it. I presume
drunkenness is not on the increase in Germany. And in Paris they sit
at tables in front of cafés--men and women--and sip their liqueurs.
It is a very pleasant way to enjoy your leisure. Outside of trade or
the desire to be _president_, _vice-president_, or _secretary_ of
something, we in America have so often no real diversions.

In no sense could either of these restaurants be said to be smart.
But Berlin, outside of one or two selected spots, does not run to
smartness. The “Cabaret Linden” and the “Cabaret Arcadia” were, once
more, of a different character. There was one woman at the Cabaret
Linden who struck me as having real artistic talent of a strongly
Teutonic variety. Claire Waldoff was her name, a hard, shock-headed
tomboy of a girl, who sang in a harsh, guttural voice of soldiers,
merchants, janitors, and policemen--a really brilliant presentation of
local German characteristics. It is curious how these little touches of
character drawn from everyday life invariably win thunders of applause.
How the world loves the homely, the simple, the odd, the silly, the
essentially true! Unlike the others at this place, there was not a
suggestive thing about anything which this woman said or did; yet this
noisy, driveling audience could not get enough of her. She was truly an
artist.

One night we went to the Palais de Danse, admittedly Berlin’s greatest
night-life achievement. For several days Herr A. had been saying:
“Now to-morrow we must go to the Palais de Danse, then you will see
something,” but every evening when we started out, something else had
intervened. I was a little skeptical of his enthusiastic praise of this
institution as being better than anything else of its kind in Europe.
You had to take Herr A.’s vigorous Teutonic estimate of Berlin with
a grain of salt, though I did think that a city that had put itself
together in this wonderful way in not much more than a half-century had
certainly considerable reason to boast.

“But what about the Café de Paris at Monte Carlo?” I suggested,
remembering vividly the beauty and glitter of the place.

“No, no, no!” he exclaimed, with great emphasis--he had a habit of
unconsciously making a fist when he was emphatic--“not in Monte Carlo,
not in Paris, not anywhere.”

“Very good,” I replied, “this must be very fine. Lead on.”

So we went.

I think Herr A. was pleased to note how much of my skepticism melted
after passing the sedate exterior of this astounding place.

“I want to tell you something,” said Herr A. as we climbed out of our
taxi--a good, solid, reasonably priced, Berlin taxi--“if you come
with your wife, your daughter, or your sister you buy a ticket for
yourself--four marks--and walk in. Nothing is charged for your female
companions and no notice is taken of them. If you come here with a
demi-mondaine, you pay four marks for yourself and four for her, and
you cannot get in without. They know. They have men at the door who are
experts in this matter. They want you to bring such women, but you have
to pay. If such a woman comes alone, she goes in free. How’s that?”

Once inside we surveyed a brilliant spectacle--far more ornate than
the Café l’Abbaye or the Café Maxim, though by no means so enticing.
Paris is Paris and Berlin is Berlin and the Germans cannot do as do the
French. They haven’t the air--the temperament. Everywhere in Germany
you feel that--that strange solidity of soul which cannot be gay
as the French are gay. Nevertheless the scene inside was brilliant.
Brilliant was the word. I would not have believed, until I saw it,
that the German temperament or the German sense of thrift would have
permitted it and yet after seeing the marvelous German officer, why not?

The main chamber--very large--consisted of a small, central, highly
polished dancing floor, canopied far above by a circular dome of
colored glass, glittering white or peach-pink by turns, and surrounded
on all sides by an elevated platform or floor, two or three feet
above it, crowded with tables ranged in circles on ascending steps,
so that all might see. Beyond the tables again was a wide, level,
semi-circular promenade, flanked by ornate walls and divans and set
with palms, marbles and intricate gilt curio cases. The general
effect was one of intense light, pale, diaphanous silks of creams and
lemon hues, white-and-gold walls, white tables,--a perfect glitter
of glass mirrors, and picturesque paneling. Beyond the dancing-floor
was a giant, gold-tinted, rococo organ, and within a recess in this,
under the tinted pipes, a stringed orchestra. The place was crowded
with women of the half-world, for the most part Germans--unusually
slender, in the majority of cases delicately featured, as the best of
these women are, and beautifully dressed. I say beautifully. Qualify
it any way you want to. Put it dazzlingly, ravishingly, showily,
outrageously--any way you choose. No respectable woman might come so
garbed. Many of these women were unbelievably attractive, carried
themselves with a grand air, pea-fowl wise, and lent an atmosphere of
color and life of a very showy kind. The place was also crowded, I need
not add, with young men in evening clothes. Only champagne was served
to drink--champagne at twenty marks the bottle. Champagne at twenty
marks the bottle in Berlin is high. You can get a fine suit of clothes
for seventy or eighty marks.

The principal diversions here were dining, dancing, drinking. As at
Monte Carlo and in Paris, you saw here that peculiarly suggestive
dancing of the habitués and the more skilled performances of those
especially hired for the occasion. The Spanish and Russian dancers,
as in Paris, the Turkish and Tyrolese specimens, gathered from Heaven
knows where, were here. There were a number of handsome young officers
present who occasionally danced with the women they were escorting.
When the dancing began the lights in the dome turned pink. When it
ceased, the lights in the dome were a glittering white. The place is,
I fancy, a rather quick development for Berlin. We drank champagne,
waved away charmers, and finally left, at two or three o’clock, when
the law apparently compelled the closing of this great central chamber;
though after that hour all the patrons who desired might adjourn to an
inner sanctum, quite as large, not so showy, but full of brilliant,
strolling, dining, drinking life where, I was informed, one could stay
till eight in the morning if one chose. There was some drunkenness
here, but not much, and an air of heavy gaiety. I left thinking to
myself, “Once is enough for a place like this.”

I went one day to Potsdam and saw the Imperial Palace and grounds and
the Royal Parade. The Emperor had just left for Venice. As a seat of
royalty it did not interest me at all. It was a mere imitation of
the grounds and palace at Versailles, but as a river valley it was
excellent. Very dull, indeed, were the state apartments. I tried to be
interested in the glass ballrooms, picture galleries, royal auditoriums
and the like. But alas! The servitors, by the way, were just as anxious
for tips as any American waiters. Potsdam did not impress me. From
there I went to Grunewald and strolled in the wonderful forest for an
enchanted three hours. That was worth while.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rivers of every city have their individuality and to me the Spree
and its canals seem eminently suited to Berlin. The water effects--and
they are always artistically important and charming--are plentiful.

The most pleasing portions of Berlin to me were those which related to
the branches of the Spree--its canals and the lakes about it. Always
there were wild ducks flying over the housetops, over offices and
factories; ducks passing from one bit of water to another, their long
necks protruding before them, their metallic colors gleaming in the sun.

You see quaint things in Berlin, such as you will not see
elsewhere--the Spreewald nurses, for instance, in the Thiergarten with
their short, scarlet, balloon skirt emphasized by a white apron, their
triangular white linen head-dress, very conspicuous. It was actually
suggested to me one day as something interesting to do, to go to the
Zoological Gardens and see the animals fed! I chanced to come there
when they were feeding the owls, giving each one a mouse,--live or
dead, I could not quite make out. That was enough for me. I despise
flesh-eating birds anyhow. They are quite the most horrible of all
evoluted specimens. This particular collection--eagles, hawks, condors,
owls of every known type and variety, and buzzards--all sat in their
cages gorging themselves on raw meat or mice. The owls, to my disgust,
fixed me with their relentless eyes, the while they tore at the
entrails of their victims. As a realist, of course, I ought to accept
all these delicate manifestations of the iron constitution of the
universe as interesting, but I can’t. Now and then, very frequently, in
fact, life becomes too much for my hardy stomach. I withdraw, chilled
and stupefied by the way strength survives and weakness goes under. And
to think that as yet we have no method of discovering why the horrible
appears and no reason for saying that it should not. Yet one can
actually become surfeited with beauty and art and take refuge in the
inartistic and the unlovely!

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the Berliners’ most wearying characteristics is their
contentious attitude. To the few, barring the women, to whom I was
introduced, I could scarcely talk. As a matter of fact, I was not
expected to. _They_ would talk to _me_. Argument was, in its way,
obviously an insult. Anything that I might have to say or suggest
was of small importance; anything they had to say was of the utmost
importance commercially, socially, educationally, spiritually,--any
way you chose,--and they emphasized so many of their remarks with a
deep voice, a hard, guttural force, a frown, or a rap on the table with
their fists that I was constantly overawed.

Take this series of incidents as typical of the Berlin spirit: One
day as I walked along Unter den Linden I saw a minor officer standing
in front of a sentry who was not far from his black-and-white striped
sentry-box, his body as erect as a ramrod, his gun “presented” stiff
before him, not an eyelash moving, not a breath stirring. This endured
for possibly fifty seconds or longer. You would not get the importance
of this if you did not realize how strict the German military
regulations are. At the sound of an officer’s horn or the observed
approach of a superior officer there is a noticeable stiffening of the
muscles of the various sentries in sight. In this instance the minor
officer imagined that he had not been saluted properly, I presume, and
suspected that the soldier was heavy with too much beer. Hence the
rigid test that followed. After the officer was gone, the soldier
looked for all the world like a self-conscious house-dog that has
just escaped a good beating, sheepishly glancing out of the corners
of his eyes and wondering, no doubt, if by any chance the officer was
coming back. “If he had moved so much as an eyelid,” said a citizen
to me, emphatically and approvingly, “he would have been sent to the
guard-house, and rightly. _Swine-hound!_ He should tend to his duties!”

Coming from Milan to Lucerne, and again from Lucerne to Frankfort, and
again from Frankfort to Berlin, I sat in the various dining-cars next
to Germans who were obviously in trade and successful. Oh, the compact
sufficiency of them! “Now, when you are in Italy,” said one to another,
“you see signs--‘French spoken,’ or ‘English spoken’; not ‘German
spoken.’ Fools! They really do not know where their business comes
from.”

On the train from Lucerne to Frankfort I overheard another sanguine and
vigorous pair. Said one: “Where I was in Spain, near Barcelona, things
were wretched. Poor houses, poor wagons, poor clothes, poor stores. And
they carry English and American goods--these dunces! Proud and slow.
You can scarcely tell them anything.”

“We will change all that in ten years,” replied the other. “We are
going after that trade. They need up-to-date German methods.”

In a café in Charlottenberg, near the Kaiser-Friedrich
Gedächtnis-Kirche, I sat with three others. One was from Leipzig, in
the fur business. The others were merchants of Berlin. I was not of
their party, merely an accidental auditor.

“In Russia the conditions are terrible. They do not know what life is.
Such villages!”

“Do the English buy there much?”

“A great deal.”

“We shall have to settle this trade business with war yet. It will
come. We shall have to fight.”

“In eight days,” said one of the Berliners, “we could put an army
of one hundred and fifty thousand men in England with all supplies
sufficient for eight weeks. Then what would they do?”

Do these things suggest the German sense of self-sufficiency and
ability? They are the commonest of the commonplaces.

During the short time that I was in Berlin I was a frequent witness
of quite human but purely Teutonic bursts of temper--that rapid,
fiery mounting of choler which verges apparently on a physical
explosion,--the bursting of a blood vessel. I was going home one night
late, with Herr A., from the Potsdamer Bahnhof, when we were the
witnesses of an absolutely magnificent and spectacular fight between
two Germans--so Teutonic and temperamental as to be decidedly worth
while. It occurred between a German escorting a lady and carrying a
grip at the same time, and another German somewhat more slender and
somewhat taller, wearing a high hat and carrying a walking-stick. This
was on one of the most exclusive suburban lines operating out of Berlin.

[Illustration: Teutonic bursts of temper]

It appears that the gentleman with the high hat and cane, in running to
catch his train along with many others, severely jostled the gentleman
with the lady and the portmanteau. On the instant, an absolutely
terrific explosion! To my astonishment--and, for the moment, I can
say my horror--I saw these two very fiercely attack each other, the
one striking wildly with his large portmanteau, the other replying
with lusty blows of his stick, a club-like affair which fell with hard
whacks on his rival’s head. Hats were knocked off, shirt-fronts
marked and torn; blood began to flow where heads and faces were cut
severely, and almost pandemonium broke loose in the surrounding crowd.

Fighting always produces an atmosphere of intensity in any nationality,
but this German company seemed fairly to coruscate with anguish, wrath,
rage, blood-thirsty excitement. The crowd surged to and fro as the
combatants moved here and there. A large German officer, his brass
helmet a welcome shield in such an affair, was brought from somewhere.
Such noble German epithets as “Swine-hound!” “Hundsknochen!” (dog’s
bone), “Schafskopf!” (sheep’s head), “Schafsgesicht!” (sheep-face), and
even more untranslatable words filled the air. The station platform was
fairly boiling with excitement. Husbands drove their wives back, wives
pulled their husbands away, or tried to, and men immediately took sides
as men will. Finally the magnificent representative of law and order,
large and impregnable as Gibraltar, interposed his great bulk between
the two. Comparative order was restored. Each contestant was led away
in an opposite direction. Some names and addresses were taken by the
policeman. In so far as I could see no arrests were made; and finally
both combatants, cut and bleeding as they were, were allowed to enter
separate cars and go their way. That was Berlin to the life. The air of
the city, of Germany almost, was ever rife with contentious elements
and emotions.

I should like to relate one more incident, and concerning quite another
angle of Teutonism. This relates to German sentiment, which is as
close to the German surface as German rage and vanity. It occurred in
the outskirts of Berlin--one of those interesting regions where solid
blocks of gold- and silver-balconied apartment houses march up to the
edge of streetless, sewerless, lightless green fields and stop. Beyond
lie endless areas of truck gardens or open common yet to be developed.
Cityward lie miles on miles of electric-lighted, vacuum-cleaned,
dumb-waitered and elevator-served apartments, and, of course, street
cars.

I had been investigating a large section of land devoted to free
(or practically free) municipal gardens for the poor, one of those
socialistic experiments of Germany which, as is always the way, benefit
the capable and leave the incapable just where they were before. As I
emerged from a large area of such land divided into very small garden
plots, I came across a little graveyard adjoining a small, neat,
white concrete church where a German burial service was in progress.
The burial ground was not significant or pretentious--a poor man’s
graveyard, that was plain. The little church was too small and too
sectarian in its mood, standing out in the wind and rain of an open
common, to be of any social significance. Lutheran, I fancied. As I
came up a little group of pall-bearers, very black and very solemn,
were carrying a white satin-covered coffin down a bare gravel path
leading from the church door, the minister following, bareheaded, and
after him the usual company of mourners in solemn high hats or thick
black veils, the foremost--a mother and a remaining daughter I took
them to be--sobbing bitterly. Just then six choristers in black frock
coats and high hats, standing to one side of the gravel path like six
blackbirds ranged on a fence, began to sing a German parting-song to
the melody of “Home Sweet Home.” The little white coffin, containing
presumably the body of a young girl, was put down by the grave while
the song was completed and the minister made a few consolatory remarks.

I have never been able, quite, to straighten out for myself the magic
of what followed--its stirring effect. Into the hole of very yellow
earth, cut through dead brown grass, the white coffin was lowered and
then the minister stood by and held out first to the father and then
to the mother and then to each of the others as they passed a small,
white, ribbon-threaded basket containing broken bits of the yellow
earth intermixed with masses of pink and red rose-leaves. As each
sobbing person came forward he, or she, took a handful of earth and
rose leaves and let them sift through his fingers to the coffin below.
A lump rose in my throat and I hurried away.




CHAPTER XLIX

ON THE WAY TO HOLLAND


I came near finding myself in serious straights financially on leaving
Berlin; for, owing to an oversight, and the fact that I was lost in
pleasant entertainment up to quite the parting hour, on examining
my cash in hand I found I had only fifteen marks all told. This was
Saturday night and my train was leaving in just thirty minutes. My taxi
fare would be two marks. I had my ticket, but excess baggage!--I saw
that looming up largely. It could mean anything in Europe--ten, twenty,
thirty marks. “Good Heavens!” I thought. “Who is there to cash a letter
of credit for me on Saturday night?” I thought of porters, taxis,
train hands at Amsterdam. “If I get there at all,” I sighed, “I get
there without a cent.” For a minute I thought seriously of delaying my
departure and seeking the aid of Herr A. However, I hurried on to the
depot where I first had my trunk weighed and found that I should have
to pay ten marks excess baggage. That was not so bad. My taxi chauffeur
demanded two. My _Packträger_ took one more, my parcel-room clerk, one
mark in fees, leaving me exactly one mark and my letter of credit.
“Good Heavens!” I sighed. “I can see the expectant customs officers at
the border! Without money I shall have to open every one of my bags. I
can see the conductor expecting four or five marks and getting nothing.
I can see--oh, Lord!”

Still I did not propose to turn back, I did not have time. The clerk at
the Amsterdam hotel would have to loan me money on my letter of credit.
So I bustled ruminatively into the train. It was a long, dusty affair,
coming from St. Petersburg and bound for Holland, Paris, and the boats
for England. It was crowded with passengers but, thank Heaven, all of
them safely bestowed in separate compartments or “drawing-rooms” after
the European fashion. I drew my blinds, undressed swiftly and got into
bed. Let all conductors rage, I thought. Porters be damned. Frontier
inspectors could go to blazes. I am going to sleep, my one mark in my
coat pocket.

I was just dozing off when the conductor called to ask if I did not
want to surrender the keys to my baggage in order to avoid being waked
in the morning at the frontier. This service merited a tip which, of
course, I was in no position to give. “Let me explain to you,” I said.
“This is the way it is. I got on this train with just one mark.” I
tried to make it clear how it all happened, in my halting German.

He was a fine, tall, military, solid-chested fellow. He looked at me
with grave, inquisitive eyes. “I will come in a little later,” he
grunted. Instead, he shook me rudely at five-thirty A. M., at some
small place in Holland, and told me that I would have to go out and
open my trunk. Short shrift for the man who cannot or will not tip!

Still I was not so downcast. For one thing we were in Holland, actually
and truly,--quaint little Holland with its five million population
crowded into cities so close together that you could get from one
to another in a half-hour or a little over. To me, it was first and
foremost the land of Frans Hals and Rembrandt van Ryn and that whole
noble company of Dutch painters. All my life I had been more or
less fascinated by those smooth surfaces, the spirited atmosphere,
those radiant simplicities of the Dutch interiors, the village inns,
windmills, canal scenes, housewives, fishwives, old topers, cattle,
and nature scenes which are the basis and substance of Dutch art.
I will admit, for argument’s sake, that the Dutch costume with its
snowy neck and head-piece and cuffs, the Dutch windmill, with its
huge wind-bellied sails, the Dutch landscape so flat and grassy and
the Dutch temperament, broad-faced and phlegmatic, have had much to
do with my art attraction, but over and beyond those there has always
been so much more than this--an indefinable something which, for want
of a better phrase, I can only call the wonder of the Dutch soul, the
most perfect expression of commonplace beauty that the world has yet
seen. So easily life runs off into the mystical, the metaphysical, the
emotional, the immoral, the passionate and the suggestive, that for
those delicate flaws of perfection in which life is revealed static,
quiescent, undisturbed, innocently gay, naïvely beautiful, how can we
be grateful enough! For those lovely, idyllic minds that were content
to paint the receipt of a letter, an evening school, dancing peasants,
a gust of wind, skaters, wild ducks, milk-time, a market, playing at
draughts, the fruiterer, a woman darning stockings, a woman scouring,
the drunken roysterers, a cow stall, cat and kittens, the grocer’s
shop, the chemist’s shop, the blacksmith’s shop, feeding-time, and the
like, my heart has only reverence. And it is not (again) this choice
of subject alone, nor the favorable atmosphere of Holland in which
these were found, so much as it is that delicate refinement of soul, of
perception, of feeling--the miracle of temperament--through which these
things were seen. _Life seen through a temperament! that is the miracle
of art._

Yet the worst illusion that can be entertained concerning art is
that it is apt to appear at any time in any country, through a given
personality or a group of individuals without any deep relation to
much deeper mystical and metaphysical things. Some little suggestion
of the artistry of life may present itself now and then through a
personality, but art in the truest sense is the substance of an age,
the significance of a country--a nationality. Even more than that,
it is a time-spirit (the _Zeitgeist_ of the Germans) that appears of
occasion to glorify a land, to make great a nation. You would think
that somewhere in the sightless substance of things--the chemistry back
of the material evidence of life--there was a lovely, roseate milling
of superior principle at times. Strange and lovely things come to the
fore--the restoration in England, the Renaissance in Italy, Florence’s
golden period, Holland’s classic art--all done in a century. “And the
spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters,” and there was that
which we know as art.

I think it was years before those two towering figures--Rembrandt and
Frans Hals (and of the two, Frans Hals is to me the greater)--appeared
in my consciousness and emphasized the distinction of Holland for me,
showing me that the loveliness of Dutch art,--the naïveté of Wouverman,
the poetic realism of Nicolaes Maes, the ultimate artistry of Vermeer,
de Hoogh, Ruysdael and all that sweet company of simple painters of
simple things,--had finally come to mean _to me_ all that _I_ can
really hope for in art--those last final reflections of halcyon days
which are the best that life has to show.

Sometimes when I think of the homely splendors of Dutch art, which
in its delicate commonplaceness has nothing to do with the more
universal significance of both Hals and Rembrandt, I get a little
wild artistically. Those smooth persuasive surfaces--pure enamel--and
symphonies of blue light which are Vermeer; those genial household
intimacies and candle-light romances which are Dou; those alleluiahs
of light and water which are Vandervelde, Backhysen, Van Goyen; those
merry-makings, perambulations, doorway chats, poultry intimacies, small
trade affections and exchanges which are Terburg and Van Ostade! Truly,
words fail me. I do not know how to suggest the poetry, the realism,
the mood, the artistic craftsmanship that go with these things.
They suggest a time, a country, an age, a mood, which is at once a
philosophy, a system, a spirit of life. What more can art be? What
more can it suggest? How, in that fortune of chance, which combines it
with color-sense, temperament, craft, can it be exceeded? And all of
this is what Dutch art--those seemingly minor phases, after Hals and
Rembrandt--means to me.

But I was in Holland now, and not concerned so much for the moment
with Dutch art as with my trunks. Still I felt here, at the frontier,
that already I was in an entirely different world. Gone was that
fever of the blood which is Germany. Gone the heavy, involute,
enduring, Teutonic architecture. The upstanding German,--kaiserlich,
self-opinionated, drastic, aggressive--was no longer about me. The
men who were unlocking trunks and bags here exemplified a softer,
milder, less military type. This mystery of national temperaments--was
I never to get done with it? As I looked about me against a pleasant
rising Sunday sun I could see and feel that not only the people but
the landscape and the architecture had changed. The architecture was
obviously so different, low, modest, one-story cottages standing out
on a smooth, green level land, so smooth and so green and so level
that anything projected against the skyline--it mattered not how
modest--thereby became significant. And I saw my first Holland windmill
turning its scarecrow arms in the distance. It was like coming out of a
Russian steam bath into the cool marble precincts of the plunge, to be
thus projected from Germany into Holland. If you will believe me I was
glad that I had no money in order that I might be driven out to see all
this.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had no trouble with trunks and bags other than opening them and
being compelled to look as though I thought it a crime to tip anybody.
I strolled about the station in the early light of a clear, soft day
and speculated on this matter of national temperaments. What a pity,
I thought, if Holland were ever annexed by Germany or France or any
country and made to modify its individuality. Before I was done with
it I was inclined to believe that its individuality would never be
modified, come any authority that might.

The balance of the trip to Amsterdam was nothing, a matter of two
hours, but it visualized all I had fancied concerning Holland. Such
a mild little land it is. So level, so smooth, so green. I began to
puzzle out the signs along the way; they seemed such a hodge-podge
of German and English badly mixed, that I had to laugh. The train
passed up the center of a street in one village where cool brick
pavements fronted cool brick houses and stores, and on one shop window
appeared the legend: “Haar Sniden.” Would not that as a statement of
hair-cutting make any German-American laugh? “Telefoon,” “stoom boot,”
“treins noor Ostend,” “land te koop” (for sale) and the like brought a
mild grin of amusement.

When we reached Amsterdam I had scarcely time to get a sense of it
before I was whisked away in an electric omnibus to the hotel; and I
was eager to get there, too, in order to replenish my purse which was
now without a single penny. The last mark had gone to the porter at
the depot to carry my bags to this ’bus. I was being deceived as to
the character of the city by this ride from the central station to the
hotel, for curiously its course gave not a glimpse of the canals that
are the most charming and pleasing features of Amsterdam--more so than
in any other city in Holland.

And now what struggles for a little ready money! My bags and fur coat
had been duly carried into the hotel and I had signified to the porter
in a lordly way that he should pay the ’busman, but seeing that I had
letters which might result in local invitations this very day a little
ready cash was necessary.

“I tell you what I should like you to do,” I observed to the clerk,
after I had properly entered my name and accepted a room. “Yesterday in
Berlin, until it was too late, I forgot to draw any money on my letter
of credit. Let me have forty gulden and I will settle with you in the
morning.”

“But, my dear sir,” he said, very doubtfully indeed and in very polite
English, “I do not see how we can do that. We do not know you.”

“It is surely not so unusual,” I suggested ingratiatingly, “you must
have done it before. You see my bags and trunk are here. Here is my
letter of credit. Let me speak to the manager.”

The dapper Dutchman looked at my fur coat and bags quite critically,
looked at my letter of credit as if he felt sure it was a forgery
and then retired into an inner office. Presently a polished creature
appeared, dark, immaculate, and after eyeing me solemnly, shook his
head. “It can’t be done,” he said.

He turned to go.

“But here, here!” I called. “This won’t do. You must be sensible.
What sort of a hotel do you keep here, anyhow? I must have forty
gulden--thirty, anyhow. My letter of credit is good. Examine it. Good
heavens! You have at least eight hundred gulden worth of luggage
there.”

He had turned and was surveying me again. “It can’t be done,” he said.

“Impossible!” I cried. “I must have it. Why, I haven’t a cent. You must
trust me until to-morrow morning.”

“Give him twenty gulden,” he said to the clerk, wearily, and turned
away.

“Good Heavens!” I said to the clerk, “give me the twenty gulden before
I die of rage.” And so he counted them out to me and I went in to
breakfast.

I was charmed to find that the room overlooked one of the lovely canals
with a distant view of others--all of them alive with canal-boats poled
along slowly by solid, placid Hollanders, the spring sunlight giving
them a warm, alluring, mildly adventurous aspect. The sense of light on
water was so delightful from the breakfast-room, a great airy place,
that it gave an added flavor to my Sunday morning breakfast of eggs and
bacon. I was so pleased with my general surroundings here that I even
hummed a tune while I ate.




CHAPTER L

AMSTERDAM


Amsterdam I should certainly include among my cities of light and
charm, a place to live in. Not that it has, in my judgment, any of
that capital significance of Paris or Rome or Venice. Though greater
by a hundred thousand in population than Frankfort, it has not even
the forceful commercial texture of that place. The spirit of the city
seemed so much more unbusinesslike,--so much slower and easier-going.
Before I sent forth a single letter of introduction I spent an entire
day idling about its so often semicircular streets, following the
canals which thread their centers like made pools, rejoicing in the
cool brick walks which line the sides, looking at the reflection of
houses and buildings in the ever-present water.

Holland is obviously a land of canals and windmills, but much more
than that it is a land of atmosphere. I have often speculated as to
just what it is that the sea does to its children that marks them so
definitely for its own. And here in Amsterdam the thought came to me
again. It is this: Your waterside idler, whether he traverses the
wide stretches of the ocean or remains at home near the sea, has a
seeming vacuity or dreaminess of soul that no rush of ordinary life
can disturb. I have noted it of every port of the sea, that the eager
intensity of men so often melts away at the water’s edge. Boats are not
loaded with the hard realism that marks the lading of trains. A sense
of the idle-devil-may-care indifference of water seems to play about
the affairs of these people, of those who have to do with them--the
unhastening indifference of the sea. Perhaps the suggestion of the
soundless, timeless, heartless deep that is in every channel, inlet,
sluice, and dock-basin is the element that is at the base of their
lagging motions. Your sailor and seafaring man will not hurry. His eyes
are wide with a strange suspicion of the deep. He knows by contact what
the subtlety and the fury of the waters are. The word of the sea is to
be indifferent. “Never you mind, dearie. As it was in the beginning, so
it ever shall be.”

I think the peace and sweetness of Amsterdam bear some relationship
to this wonderful, soporific spirit of the endless deep. As I walked
along these “grachts” and “kades” and through these “pleins”--seemingly
enameled worlds in which water and trees and red brick houses swam in a
soft light, exactly the light and atmosphere you find in Dutch art--I
felt as though I had come out of a hard modern existence such as one
finds in Germany and back into something kindly, rural, intellectual,
philosophic. Spinoza was, I believe, Holland’s contribution to
philosophy,--and a worthy Dutch philosopher he was--and Erasmus its
great scholar. Both Rembrandt and Frans Hals have indicated in their
lives the spirit of their country. I think, if you could look into the
spirits and homes of thousands of simple Hollanders, you would find
that same kindly, cleanly realism which you admire in their paintings.
It is so placid. It was so here in Amsterdam. One gathered it from the
very air. I had a feeling of peaceful, meditative delight in life and
the simplicities of living all the time I was in Holland, which I take
to be significant. All the while I was there I was wishing that I might
remain throughout the spring and summer, and dream. In Germany I was
haunted by the necessity of effort.

It was while I was in Amsterdam this first morning that the
realization that my travels were fast drawing to a close dawned upon
me. I had been having such a good time! That fresh, interested feeling
of something new to look forward to with each morning was still
enduring; but now I saw that my splendid world of adventure was all but
ended. Thoreau has proved, as I recalled now with some satisfaction,
that life can be lived, with great intellectual and spiritual
distinction in a meager way and in small compass, but oh, the wonder of
the world’s highways--the going to and fro amid the things of eminence
and memory, seeing how, thus far, this wordly house of ours has been
furnished by man and by nature.

All those wonderful lands and objects that I had looked forward to with
such keen interest a few months before were now in their way things of
the past. England, France, Italy, Germany, London, Paris, Rome, Berlin,
Canterbury, Amiens, St. Peter’s, Pisa--I could not look on those any
more with fresh and wondering eyes. How brief life is, I thought! How
taciturn in its mood! It gives us a brief sip, some of us, once and
then takes the cup away. It seemed to me, as I sat here looking out on
the fresh and sweet canals of Holland, that I could idle thus forever
jotting down foolish impressions, exclaiming over fleeting phases of
beauty, wiping my eyes at the hails and farewells that are so precious
and so sad. Holland was before me, and Belgium, and one more sip of
Paris, and a few days in England, perhaps, and then I should go back to
New York to write. I could see it--New York with its high buildings,
its clanging cars, its rough incivility. Oh, why might I not idle
abroad indefinitely?

       *       *       *       *       *

The second morning of my arrival I received a telephone message from a
sister of Madame A., Madame J., the wife of an eminent Dutch jurist who
had something to do with the International Peace Court. Would I come
to lunch this day? Her husband would be a little late, but I would not
mind. Her sister had written her. She would be so glad to see me. I
promptly accepted.

The house was near the Ryks Museum, with a charming view of water from
the windows. I can see it now--this very pleasant Holland interior.
The rooms into which I was introduced were bluish-gray in tone, the
contents spare and in good taste. Flowers in abundance. Much brass and
old copper. Madame J. was herself a study in steel blue and silver
gray, a reserved yet temperamental woman. A better linguist than Madame
A., she spoke English perfectly. She had read my book, the latest one,
and had liked it, she told me. Then she folded her hands in her lap,
leaned forward and looked at me. “I have been so curious to see what
you looked like.”

“Well,” I replied smilingly, “take a long look. I am not as wild as
early rumors would indicate, I hope. You mustn’t start with prejudices.”

She smiled engagingly. “It isn’t that. There are so many things in your
book which make me curious. It is such a strange book--self-revealing,
I imagine.”

“I wouldn’t be too sure.”

She merely continued to look at me and smile in a placid way, but her
inspection was so sympathetic and in a way alluring that it was rather
flattering than otherwise. I, in turn, studied her. Here was a woman
that, I had been told, had made an ideal marriage. And she obviously
displayed the quiet content that few achieve.

       *       *       *       *       *

Like Shakespeare, I would be the last one to admit an impediment to
the marriage of true minds. Unquestionably in this world in spite
of endless liaisons, sex diversions, divorces, marital conflicts
innumerable, the right people do occasionally find each other. There
are true chemical-physical affinities, which remain so until death
and dissolution undo their mysterious spell. Yet, on the other hand,
I should say this is the rarest of events and if I should try to
formulate the mystery of the marital trouble of this earth I should
devote considerable percentages to: a--ungovernable passion not willed
or able to be controlled by the individual; b--dull, thick-hided
irresponsiveness which sees nothing in the emotional mood of another
and knows no guiding impulse save self-interest and gluttony;
c--fickleness of that unreasoning, unthinking character which is based
on shallowness of soul and emotions--the pains resulting from such a
state are negligible; d--diverging mental conceptions of life due to
the hastened or retarded mental growth of one or the other of the high
contracting parties; e--mistaken unions, wrong from the beginning,
based on mistaken affections--cases where youth, inexperience, early
ungovernable desire lead to a union based on sex and end, of course,
in mental incompatibility; f--a hounding compulsion to seek for a high
spiritual and intellectual ideal which almost no individual can realize
for another and which yet _may_ be realized in a lightning flash, out
of a clear sky, as it were. In which case the last two will naturally
forsake all others and cleave only the one to the other. Such is sex’s
affection, mental and spiritual compatibility.

But in marriage, as in no other trade, profession, or contract, once
a bargain is struck--a mistake made--society suggests that there is
no solution save in death. You cannot back out. It is almost the
only place where you cannot correct a mistake and start all over.
Until death do us part! Think of that being written and accepted of
a mistaken marriage! My answer is that death would better hurry up.
If the history of human marriage indicates anything, it is that the
conditions which make for the union of two individuals, male and
female, are purely fortuitous, that marriages are not made in heaven
but in life’s conditioning social laboratory, and that the marriage
relation, as we understand it, is quite as much subject to modification
and revision as anything else. Radical as it may seem, I predict a
complete revision of the home standards as we know them. I would not be
in the least surprised if the home, as we know it, were to disappear
entirely. New, modifying conditions are daily manifesting themselves.
Aside from easy divorce which is a mere safety valve and cannot safely
(and probably will not) be dispensed with, there are other things which
are steadily undermining the old home system as it has been practised.
For instance, endless agencies which tend to influence, inspire, and
direct the individual or child, entirely apart from the control and
suggestion of parents, are now at work. In the rearing of the _average_
child the influence of the average parent is steadily growing less.
Intellectual, social, spiritual freedom are constantly being suggested
to the individual, but not by the home. People are beginning to see
that they have a right to seek and seek until they find that which is
best suited to their intellectual, physical, spiritual development,
home or no home. No mistake, however great, or disturbing in its
consequences, it is beginning to be seen, should be irretrievable.
The greater the mistake, really, the easier it should be to right it.
Society _must_ and _is_ opening the prison doors of human misery, and
old sorrows are walking out into the sunlight where they are being
dispelled and forgotten. As sure as there are such things as mental
processes, spiritual affinities, significant individualities and as
sure as these things are increasing in force, volume, numbers, so
sure, also, is it that the marriage state and the sex relation with
which these things are so curiously and indissolubly involved will be
modified, given greater scope, greater ease of adjustment, greater
simplicity of initiation, greater freedom as to duration, greater
kindliness as to termination. And the state will guarantee the right,
privileges and immunities of the children to the entire satisfaction of
the state, the parents, and the children. It cannot be otherwise.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mynheer J. joined us presently. He was rather spare, very waxy, very
intellectual, very unattached philosophically--apparently--and yet
very rigid in his feeling for established principle. The type is quite
common among intellectuals. Much reading had not made him mad but a
little pedantic. He was speculatively interested in international peace
though he did not believe that it could readily be established. Much
more, apparently, he was interested in the necessity of building up a
code or body of international laws which would be flexible and binding
on all nations. Imaginatively I could see him at his heavy tomes. He
had thin, delicate, rather handsome hands; a thin, dapper, wiry body.
He was older than Madame J.,--say fifty-five or sixty. He had nice,
well-barbered, short gray whiskers, a short, effective mustache, loose,
well-trained, rather upstanding hair. Some such intellectual Northman
Ibsen intended to give Hedda.




CHAPTER LI

“SPOTLESS TOWN”


At three o’clock I left these pleasant people to visit the Ryks Museum
and the next morning ran over to Haarlem, a half-hour away, to look
at the Frans Hals in the Stadhuis. Haarlem was the city, I remember
with pleasure, that once suffered the amazing tulip craze that swept
over Holland in the sixteenth century--the city in which single rare
tulips, like single rare carnations to-day, commanded enormous sums of
money. Rare species, because of the value of the subsequent bulb sale,
sold for hundreds of thousands of gulden. I had heard of the long line
of colored tulip beds that lay between here and Haarlem and The Hague
and I was prepared to judge for myself whether they were beautiful--as
beautiful as the picture post-cards sold everywhere indicated. I found
this so, but even more than the tulip beds I found the country round
about from Amsterdam to Haarlem, The Hague and Rotterdam delightful.
I traveled by foot and by train, passing by some thirty miles of
vari-colored flower-beds in blocks of red, white, blue, purple, pink,
and yellow, that lie between the several cities. I stood in the old
Groote Kerk of St. Bavo in Haarlem, the Groote Kerk of St. James in
The Hague--both as bare of ornament as an anchorite’s cell--I wandered
among the art treasures of the Ryks Museum in Amsterdam and the
Mauritshuis and the Mesdag Museum in The Hague; I walked in the forests
of moss-tinted trees at Haarlem and again at The Hague; my impression
was that compact little Holland had all the charm of a great private
estate, beautifully kept and intimately delightful.

But the canals of Holland--what an airy impression of romance, of pure
poetry, they left on my mind! There are certain visions or memories
to which the heart of every individual instinctively responds. The
canals of Holland are one such to me. I can see them now, in the early
morning, when the sun was just touching them with the faintest pearls,
pinks, lavenders, blues, their level surfaces as smooth as glass,
their banks rising no whit above the level of the water, but lying
even with it like a black or emerald frame, their long straight lines
broken at one point or another by a low brown or red or drab cottage or
windmill! I can see them again at evening, the twilight hour, when in
that poetically suffused mood of nature, which obtains then, they lie,
liquid masses of silver, a shred of tinted cloud reflected in their
surface, the level green grass turning black about them, a homing bird,
a mass of trees in the distance, or humble cottage, its windows faintly
gold from within, lending those last touches of artistry which make the
perfection of nature. As in London and Venice the sails of their boats
were colored a soft brown, and now and again one appeared in the fading
light, a healthy Hollander smoking his pipe at the tiller, a cool wind
fanning his brow. The world may hold more charming pictures but I have
not encountered them.

And across the level spaces of lush grass that seemingly stretch
unbroken for miles--bordered on this side or that with a little patch
of filigree trees; ribboned and segmented by straight silvery threads
of water; ornamented in the foreground by a cow or two, perhaps, or
a boatman steering his motor-power canal boat; remotely ended by the
seeming outlines of a distant city, as delicately penciled as a line
by Vierge--stand the windmills. I have seen ten, twelve, fifteen,
marching serenely across the fields in a row, of an afternoon, like
great, heavy, fat Dutchmen, their sails going in slow, patient
motions, their great sides rounding out like solid Dutch ribs,--naïve,
delicious things. There were times when their outlines took on classic
significance. Combined with the utterly level land, the canals and the
artistically martialed trees, they constitute the very atmosphere of
Holland.

       *       *       *       *       *

Haarlem, when I reached it, pleased me almost as much as Amsterdam,
though it had no canals to speak of--by comparison. It was so clean and
fresh and altogether lovely. It reminded me of _Spotless Town_--the
city of advertising fame--and I was quite ready to encounter the mayor,
the butcher, the doctor and other worthies of that ultra-respectable
city. Coming over from Amsterdam, I saw a little Dutch girl in wooden
shoes come down to a low gate which opened directly upon a canal and
dip up a pitcher of water. That was enough to key up my mood to the
most romantic pitch. I ventured forth right gaily in a warm spring sun
and spent the better portion of an utterly delightful day idling about
its streets and museums.

Haarlem, to me, aside from the tulip craze, was where Frans Hals
lived and where in 1610, when he was thirty years of age, he married
and where six years later he was brought before the Burgomaster
for ill-treating his wife, and ordered to abstain from “_dronken
schnappe_.” Poor Frans Hals! The day I was there a line of motor-cars
stood outside the Stadhuis waiting while their owners contemplated
the wonders of the ten Regents pictures inside which are the pride
of Haarlem. When I left London Sir Scorp was holding his recently
discovered portrait by Hals at forty thousand pounds or more. I fancy
to-day any of the numerous portraits by Hals in his best manner would
bring two hundred thousand dollars and very likely much more. Yet at
seventy-two Hals’s goods and chattels--three mattresses, one chair,
one table, three bolsters, and five pictures--were sold to satisfy a
baker’s bill, and from then on, until he died fourteen years later, at
eighty-six, his “rent and firing” were paid for by the municipality.
Fate probably saved a very great artist from endless misery by letting
his first wife die. As it was he appears to have had his share of
wretchedness.

The business of being really great is one of the most pathetic things
in the world. When I was in London a close friend of Herbert Spencer
told me the story of his last days, and how, save for herself, there
was scarcely any one to cheer him in his loneliness. It was not that
he lacked living means--he had that--but living as he did, aloft
in the eternal snows of speculation, there was no one to share his
thoughts,--no one. It was the fate of that gigantic mind to be lonely.
What a pity the pleasures of the bottle or a drug might not eventually
have allured him. Old Omar knew the proper antidote for these
speculative miseries.

And Rembrandt van Ryn--there was another. It is probably true that from
1606, when he was born, until 1634, when he married at twenty-eight,
he was gay enough. He had the delicious pleasure of discovering that
he was an artist. Then he married Saskia van Uylenborch--the fair
Saskia whom he painted sitting so gaily on his knee--and for eight
years he was probably supremely happy. Saskia had forty thousand gulden
to contribute to this _ménage_. Rembrandt’s skill and fame were just
attaining their most significant proportions, when she died. Then,
being an artist, his affairs went from bad to worse; and you have the
spectacle of this other seer, Holland’s metaphysician, color-genius,
life-interpreter, descending to an entanglement with a rather dull
housekeeper, losing his money, having all his possessions sold to pay
his debts and living out his last days in absolute loneliness at the
Keizerskroon Inn in Amsterdam--quite neglected; for the local taste for
art had changed, and the public was a little sick of Hals and Rembrandt.

As I sat in the Kroon restaurant, in Haarlem, opposite the Groote Kerk,
watching some pigeons fly about the belfry, looking at Lieven de Key’s
meat market, the prototype of Dutch quaintness, and meditating on the
pictures of these great masters that I had just seen in the Stadhuis,
the insignificance of the individual as compared with the business of
life came to me with overwhelming force. We are such minute, dusty
insects at best, great or small. The old age of most people is so
trivial and insignificant. We become mere shells--“granthers,” “Goody
Two-Shoes,” “lean and slippered pantaloons.” The spirit of life works
in masses--not individuals. It prefers a school or species to a single
specimen. A great man or woman is an accident. A great work of art of
almost any kind is almost always fortuitous--like this meat market
over the way. Life, for instance, I speculated sitting here, cared no
more for Frans Hals or Rembrandt or Lieven de Key than I cared for the
meanest butcher or baker of their day. If they chanced to find a means
of subsistence--well and good; if not, well and good also. “Vanity,
vanity, saith the preacher, all is vanity.” Even so.

From Haarlem I went on to The Hague, about fifty minutes away; from The
Hague, late that evening, to Rotterdam; from Rotterdam to Dordrecht,
and so into Belgium, where I was amused to see everything change
again--the people, language, signs,--all. Belgium appeared to be
French, with only the faintest suggestion of Holland about it--but
it was different enough from France also to be interesting on its own
account.

After a quick trip across Belgium with short but delightful stops at
Bruges, that exquisite shell of a once great city, at Ghent and at
Brussels, the little Paris, I arrived once more at the French capital.




CHAPTER LII

PARIS AGAIN


Once I was in Paris again. It was delightful, for now it was spring,
or nearly so, and the weather was pleasant. People were pouring into
the city in droves from all over the world. It was nearly midnight
when I arrived. My trunk, which I had sent on ahead, was somewhere
in the limbo of advance trunks and I had a hard time getting it.
Parisian porters and depot attendants know exactly when to lose all
understanding of English and all knowledge of the sign language. It is
when the search for anything becomes the least bit irksome. The tip
they expect to get from you spurs them on a little way, but not very
far. Let them see that the task promises to be somewhat wearisome and
they disappear entirely. I lost two _facteurs_ in this way, when they
discovered that the trunk was not ready to their hand, and so I had
to turn in and search among endless trunks myself. When I found it, a
_facteur_ was quickly secured to truck it out to a taxi. And, not at
all wonderful to relate, the first man I had employed now showed up
to obtain his _pourboire_. “Oh, here you are!” I exclaimed, as I was
getting into my taxi. “Well, you can go to the devil!” He pulled a long
face. That much English he knew.

When I reached the hotel in Paris I found Barfleur registered there but
not yet returned to his room. But several letters of complaint were
awaiting me: Why hadn’t I telegraphed the exact hour of my arrival;
why hadn’t I written fully? It wasn’t pleasant to wait in uncertainty.
If I had only been exact, several things could have been arranged for
this day or evening. While I was meditating on my sins of omission and
commission, a _chasseur_ bearing a note arrived. Would I dress and
come to G.’s Bar. He would meet me at twelve. This was Saturday night,
and it would be good to look over Paris again. I knew what that meant.
We would leave the last restaurant in broad daylight, or at least the
Paris dawn.

Coming down on the train from Brussels I had fallen into a blue funk--a
kind of mental miasma--one of the miseries Barfleur never indulged
in. They almost destroy me. Barfleur never, in so far as I could
see, succumbed to the blues. In the first place my letter of credit
was all but used up--my funds were growing terrifyingly low; and it
did not make me any more cheerful to realize that my journey was now
practically at an end. A few more days and I would be sailing for home.

When, somewhat after twelve, I arrived at G.’s Bar I was still
a little doleful. Barfleur was there. He had just come in. That
indescribable Parisian tension--that sense of life at the topmost
level of nervous strength and energy--was filling this little place.
The same red-jacketed musicians; the same efficient, inconspicuous,
attentive and courteous waiters; Madame G., placid, philosophic, comfy,
businesslike and yet motherlike, was going to and fro, pleasingly
arrayed, looking no doubt after the interests, woes, and aspirations
of her company of very, very bad but beautiful “girls.” The walls were
lined with life-loving patrons of from twenty-five to fifty years of
age, with their female companions. Barfleur was at his best. He was
once more in Paris--his beloved Paris. He beamed on me in a cheerful,
patronizing way.

“So there you are! The Italian bandits didn’t waylay you, even if they
did rob you, I trust? The German Empire didn’t sit too heavily on you?
Holland and Switzerland must have been charming as passing pictures.
Where did you stop in Amsterdam?”

“At the Amstel.”

“Quite right. An excellent hotel. I trust Madame A. was nice to you?”

“She was as considerate as she could be.”

“Right and fitting. She should have been. I saw that you stopped at the
National, in Lucerne. That is one of the best hotels in Europe. I was
glad to see that your taste in hotels was not falling off.”

We began with appetizers, some soup, and a light wine. I gave a rough
summary of some things I had seen, and then we came to the matter of my
sailing date and a proposed walking trip in England.

“Now, I’ll tell you what I think we should do and then you can use your
own judgment,” suggested Barfleur. “By the time we get to London, next
Wednesday or Tuesday, England will be in prime condition. The country
about Dorchester will be perfect. I suggest that we take a week’s walk,
anyway. You come to Bridgely Level--it is beautiful there now--and stay
a week or ten days. I should like you to see how charming it is about
my place in the spring. Then we will go to Dorchester. Then you can
come back to Bridgely Level. Why not stay in England and write this
summer?”

I put up a hand in serious opposition. “You know I can’t do that. Why,
if I had so much time, we might as well stay over here and settle
down in--well, Fontainebleau. Besides, money is a matter of prime
consideration with me. I’ve got to buckle down to work at once at
anything that will make me ready money. I think in all seriousness I
had best drop the writing end of the literary profession for a while
anyway and return to the editorial desk.”

The geniality and romance that lightened Barfleur’s eye, as he thought
of the exquisite beauty of England in the spring, faded, and his face
became unduly severe.

“Really,” he said, with a grand air, “you discourage me. At times,
truly, I am inclined to quit. You are a man, in so far as I can see,
with absolutely no faith in yourself--a man without a profession or an
appropriate feeling for his craft. You are inclined, on the slightest
provocation, to give up. You neither save anything over from yesterday
in the shape of satisfactory reflection nor look into the future with
any optimism. Do, I beg of you, have a little faith in the future.
Assume that a day is a day, wherever it is, and that so long as it is
not in the past it has possibilities. Here you are a man of forty;
the formative portion of your life is behind you. Your work is all
indicated and before you. Public faith such as my own should have some
weight with you and yet after a tour of Europe, such as you would
not have reasonably contemplated a year ago, you sink down supinely
and talk of quitting. Truly it is too much. You make me feel very
desperate. One cannot go on in this fashion. You must cultivate some
intellectual stability around which your emotions can center and settle
to anchor.”

“Fairest Barfleur,” I replied, “how you preach! You have real
oratorical ability at times. There is much in what you say. I should
have a profession, but we are looking at life from slightly different
points of view. You have in your way a stable base, financially
speaking. At least I assume so. I have not. My outlook, outside of the
talent you are inclined to praise, is not very encouraging. It is not
at all sure that the public will manifest the slightest interest in
me from now on. If I had a large bump of vanity and the dull optimism
of the unimaginative, I might assume anything and go gaily on until
I was attacked somewhere for a board bill. Unfortunately I have not
the necessary thickness of hide. And I suffer periods of emotional
disturbance such as do not appear to afflict you. If you want to adjust
my artistic attitude so nicely, contemplate my financial state first
and see if that does not appeal to you as having some elements capable
of disturbing my not undue proportion of equanimity.” We then went
into actual figures from which to his satisfaction he deducted that,
with ordinary faith in myself, I had no real grounds for distress, and
I from mine figured that my immediate future was quite as dubious as
I had fancied. It did not appear that I was to have any money when I
left England. Rather I was to draw against my future and trust that my
innate capabilities would see me through.

It was definitely settled at this conference that I was not to take
the long-planned walking tour in the south of England, lovely as it
would be, but instead, after three or four days in Paris and three or
four days in London, I was to take a boat sailing from Dover about the
middle of April or a little later which would put me in New York before
May. This agreed we returned to our pleasures and spent three or four
very delightful days together.

It is written of Hugo and Balzac that they always looked upon Paris
as the capital of the world. I am afraid I shall have to confess to
a similar feeling concerning New York. I know it all so well--its
splendid water spaces, its magnificent avenues, its varying sections,
the rugged splendor of its clifflike structures, the ripping force of
its tides of energy and life. Viewing Europe from the vantage point of
the seven countries I had seen, I was prepared to admit that in so many
ways we are, temperamentally and socially speaking, the rawest of raw
material. No one could be more crude, more illusioned than the average
American. Contrasted with the _savoir faire_, the life understanding,
the philosophic acceptance of definite conditions in nature, the
Europeans are immeasurably superior. They are harder, better trained,
more settled in the routine of things. The folderols of romance, the
shibboleths of politics and religion, the false standards of social
and commercial supremacy are not so readily accepted there as here.
Ill-founded aspiration is not so rife there as here: every Jack does
not consider himself, regardless of qualifications, appointed by God
to tell his neighbor how he shall do and live. But granting all this,
America, and particularly New York, has to me the most comforting
atmosphere of any. The subway is like my library table--it is so much
of an intimate. Broadway is the one idling show place. Neither the
Strand nor the Boulevard des Capucines can replace it. Fifth Avenue is
all that it should be--the one really perfect show street of the world.
All in all the Atlantic metropolis is the first city in the world to
me,--first in force, unrivaled in individuality, richer and freer in
its spirit than London or Paris, though so often more gauche, more
tawdry, more shamblingly inexperienced.

As I sat in Madame G.’s Bar, the pull of the city overseas was on
me--and that in the spring! I wanted to go _home_.

We talked of the women we had got to know in Paris--of Marcelle and
Madame de B.--and other figures lurking in the background of this
brilliant city. But Marcelle would expect a trip to Fontainebleau and
Madame de B. was likely to be financially distressed. This cheerful
sort of companionship would be expensive. Did I care to submit to the
expense? I did not. I felt that I could not. So for once we decided to
be modest and go out and see what we could see alone. Our individual
companionship was for the time-being sufficient.

Barfleur and I truly kept step with Paris these early spring days.
This first night together we revisited all our favorite cafés and
restaurants--Fysher’s Bar, the Rat Mort, C----’s Bar, the Abbaye
Thélème, Maxim’s, the American, Paillard’s and the like,--and this, I
soon realized: without a keen sex interest--the companionship of these
high-voltage ladies of Paris--I can imagine nothing duller. It becomes
a brilliant but hollow spectacle.

The next day was Sunday. It was warm and sunny as a day could be. The
air was charged with a kind of gay expectation. Barfleur had discovered
a neo-impressionist portraitist of merit, one Hans Bols, and had agreed
to have his portrait done by him. This Sunday morning was the first day
for a series of three sittings; so I left him and spent a delicious
morning in the Bois. Paris in spring! The several days--from Saturday
to Wednesday--were like a dream. A gay world--full of the subtleties of
social ambition, of desire, fashion, love-making, and all the keenest,
shrewdest aspects of life. It was interesting, at the Café Madrid
and The Elysée, to sit out under trees and the open sky and see an
uninterrupted stream of automobiles and taxis pouring up, depositing
smart-looking people all glancing keenly about, nodding to friends, now
cordially, now tentatively, in a careful, selective social way.

One evening after I returned from a late ramble alone, I found on my
table a note from Barfleur. “For God’s sake, if you get this in time,
come at once to the Abbaye Thélème. I am waiting for you with a Mrs.
L., who wants to meet you.” So I had to change to evening clothes
at one-thirty in the morning. And it was the same old thing when I
reached there--waiters tumbling over one another with their burdens of
champagne, fruit, ices, confitures; the air full of colored glucose
balls, colored balloons floating aloft, endless mirrors reflecting a
giddy panorama, white arms, white necks, animated faces, snowy shirt
bosoms--the old story. Spanish dancers in glittering scales, American
negroes in evening clothes singing coon songs, excited life-lovers,
male and female, dancing erotically in each other’s arms. Can it be, I
asked myself, that this thing goes on night after night and year after
year? Yet it was obvious that it did.

The lady in question was rather remote--as an English-woman _can_ be.
I’m sure she said to herself, “This is a very dull author.” But I
couldn’t help it. She froze my social sense into icy crystals of “yes”
and “no.” We took her home presently and continued our rounds till the
wee sma’ hours.




CHAPTER LIII

THE VOYAGE HOME


The following Wednesday Barfleur and I returned to London via Calais
and Dover. We had been, between whiles, to the races at Longchamps,
luncheons at Au Père Boivin, the Pré Catalan, and elsewhere. I had
finally looked up Marcelle, but the concierge explained that she was
out of town.

In spite of the utter fascination of Paris I was not at all sorry to
leave, for I felt that to be happy here one would want a more definite
social life and a more fixed habitation than this hotel and the small
circle of people that we had met could provide. I took a last--almost a
yearning--look at the Avenue de l’Opéra and the Gare du Nord and then
we were off.

England was softly radiant in her spring dress. The leaves of the trees
between Dover and London were just budding, that diaphanous tracery
which resembles green lace. The endless red chimneys and sagging green
roofs and eaves of English cottages peeping out from this vesture of
spring were as romantic and poetic as an old English ballad. No doubt
at all that England--the south of it, anyhow--is in a rut; sixty years
behind the times,--but what a rut! Must all be new and polished and
shiny? As the towers and spires of Canterbury sped past to the right,
gray and crumbling in a wine-like air, something rose in my throat. I
thought of that old English song that begins--

              “When shepherds pipe on oaten straws--”

And then London once more and all the mystery of endless involute
streets and simple, hidden, unexplored regions! I went once more to
look at the grim, sad, two-story East End in spring. It was even more
pathetic for being touched by the caressing hand of Nature. I went
to look at Hyde Park and Chelsea and Seven Kings. I thought to visit
Sir Scorp--to cringe once more before the inquiring severity of his
ascetic eye; but I did not have time, as things turned out. Barfleur
was insistent that I should spend a day or two at Bridgely Level. Owing
to a great coal strike the boat I had planned to take was put out of
commission and I was compelled to advance my sailing date two days on
the boat of another line. And now I was to see Bridgely Level once
more, in the spring.

After Italy and Holland, perhaps side by side with Holland or before
it, England--the southern portion of it--is the most charmingly
individual country in Europe. For the sake of the walk, the evening
was so fine, we decided to leave the train at Maidenhead and walk the
remaining distance, some five or six miles. It was ideal. The sun was
going down and breaking through diaphanous clouds in the west, which it
tinted and gilded. The English hedges and copses were delicately tinted
with new life. English robins were on the grass; sheep, cows; over one
English hamlet and another smoke was curling and English crows or rooks
were gaily cawing, cheered at the thought of an English spring.

As gay as children, Barfleur and I trudged the yellow English road.
Now and then we passed through a stile and cut diagonally across a
field where a path was laid for the foot of man. Every so often we met
an English laborer, his trousers gripped just below the knee by the
customary English strap. Green and red; green and red; (such were the
houses and fields) with new spring violets, apple trees in blossom, and
peeping steeples over sloping hillsides thrown in for good measure.
I felt--what shall I say I felt?--not the grandeur of Italy, but
something so delicate and tender, so reminiscent and aromatic--faintly
so--of other days and other fames, that my heart was touched as by
music. Near Bridgely Level we encountered Wilkins going home from his
work, a bundle of twigs under his arm, a pruning hook at his belt, his
trousers strapped after the fashion of his class.

“Well, Wilkins!” I exclaimed.

“W’y, ’ow do you do, sir, Mr. Dreiser? Hi’m glad to see you again, Hi
am,” touching his cap. “Hi ’opes as ’ow you’ve had a pleasant trip.”

“Very, Wilkins, very,” I replied grandiosely. Who cannot be grandiose
in the presence of the fixed conditions of old England. I asked after
his work and his health and then Barfleur gave him some instructions
for the morrow. We went on in a fading light--an English twilight. And
when we reached the country house it was already aglow in anticipation
of this visit. Hearth fires were laid. The dining-room, reception-hall,
and living-room were alight. Dora appeared at the door, quite as
charming and rosy in her white apron and cap as the day I left, but she
gave no more sign that I was strange or had been absent than as if I
had not been away.

“Now we must make up our minds what particular wines we want for
dinner. I have an excellent champagne of course; but how about a light
Burgundy or a Rhine wine? I have an excellent Assmanshäuser.”

“I vote for the light Burgundy,” I said.

“Done. I will speak to Dora now.”

And while he went to instruct Dora, I went to look after all my
belongings in order to bring them finally together for my permanent
departure. After a delicious dinner and one of those comfortable,
reminiscent talks that seem naturally to follow the end of the day, I
went early to bed.

When the day came to sail I was really glad to be going home, although
on the way I had quarreled so much with my native land for the things
which it lacks and which Europe apparently has.

Our boasted democracy has resulted in little more than the privilege
every living, breathing American has of being rude and brutal to every
other, but it is not beyond possibility that sometime as a nation we
will sober down into something approximating human civility. Our early
revolt against sham civility has, in so far as I can see, resulted in
nothing save the abolition of all civility--which is sickening. Life, I
am sure, will shame us out of it eventually. We will find we do not get
anywhere by it. And I blame it all on the lawlessness of the men at the
top. They have set the example which has been most freely copied.

Still, I was glad to be going home.

When the time came the run from London to Folkstone and Dover was
pleasant with its fleeting glimpses of the old castle at Rochester
and the spires of the cathedral at Canterbury, the English orchards,
the slopes dotted with sheep, the nestled chimneys and the occasional
quaint, sagging roofs of moss-tinted tiles. The conductor who had
secured me a compartment to myself appeared just after we left
Folkstone to tell me not to bother about my baggage, saying that I
would surely find it all on the dock when I arrived to take the boat.
It was exactly as he said, though having come this way I found two
transfers necessary. Trust the English to be faithful. It is the one
reliable country in which you may travel. At Dover I meditated on how
thoroughly my European days were over and when, if ever, I should come
again. Life offers so much to see and the human span is so short that
it is a question whether it is advisable ever to go twice to the same
place--a serious question. If I had my choice, I decided--as I stood
and looked at the blue bay of Dover--I would, if I could, spend six
months each year in the United States and then choose Paris as my other
center and from there fare forth as I pleased.

After an hour’s wait at Dover, the big liner dropped anchor in the
roadstead and presently the London passengers were put on board and we
were under way. The Harbor was lovely in a fading light--chalk-blue
waters, tall whitish cliffs, endless squealing, circling gulls, and a
bugle calling from the fort in the city.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our ship’s captain was a Christian Scientist, believing in the
nothingness of matter, the immanence of Spirit or a divine idea, yet
he was, as events proved, greatly distressed because of the perverse,
undismissable presence and hauntings of mortal thought. He had
“beliefs” concerning possible wrecks, fires, explosions--the usual
terrors of the deep, and one of the ship’s company (our deck-steward)
told me that whenever there was a fog he was always on the bridge,
refusing to leave it and that he was nervous and “as cross as hell.”
So you can see how his religious belief squared with his chemical
intuitions concerning the facts of life. A nice, healthy, brisk,
argumentative, contentious individual he was, and very anxious to have
the pretty women sit by him at dinner.

The third day we were out news came by wireless that the _Titanic_
had sunk after collision with an iceberg in mid-ocean. The news had
been given in confidence to a passenger. And this passenger had “in
confidence” told others. It was a terrible piece of news, grim in its
suggestion, and when it finally leaked out it sent a chill over all
on board. I heard it first at nine o’clock at night. A party of us
were seated in the smoking-room, a most comfortable retreat from the
terrors of the night and the sea. A damp wind had arisen, bringing with
it the dreaded fog. Sometimes I think the card room is sought because
it suggests the sea less than any place else on the ship. The great
fog-horn began mooing like some vast Brobdingnagian sea-cow wandering
on endless watery pastures. The passengers were gathered here now in
groups where, played upon by scores of lights, served with drinks
and reacted upon, one by the moods of the others, a temperamental
combustion took place which served to dispel their gloom. Yet it was
not possible entirely to keep one’s mind off the slowing down of
the ship, the grim moo of the horn, and the sound of long, swishing
breakers outside speaking of the immensity of the sea, its darkness,
depth, and terrors. Every now and then, I noticed, some one would rise
and go outside to contemplate, no doubt, the gloominess of it all.
There is nothing more unpromising to this little lamp, the body, than
the dark, foggy waters of a midnight sea.

One of the passengers, a German, came up to our table with a troubled,
mysterious air. “I got sumpin’ to tell you, gentlemen,” he said in a
stage whisper, bending over us. “You better come outside where the
ladies can’t hear.” (There were several in the room.) “I just been
talkin’ to the wireless man upstairs.”

We arose and followed him out on deck.

The German faced us, pale and trembling. “Gentlemen,” he said, “the
captain’s given orders to keep it a secret until we reach New York.
But I got it straight from the wireless man: The _Titanic_ went down
last night with nearly all on board. Only eight hundred saved and
two thousand drowned. She struck an iceberg off Newfoundland. You,
gentlemen, must promise me not to tell the ladies--otherwise I shuttn’t
have told you. I promised the man upstairs. It might get him in
trouble.”

We promised faithfully. And with one accord we went to the rail and
looked out into the blackness ahead. The swish of the sea could be
heard and the insistent moo of the fog-horn.

“And this is only Tuesday,” suggested one. His face showed a true
concern. “We’ve got a week yet on the sea, the way they will run now.
And we have to go through that region--maybe over the very spot--”

He took off his cap and scratched his hair in a foolish, thoughtful
way. I think we all began to talk at once, but no one listened. The
terror of the sea had come swiftly and directly home to all. I am
satisfied that there was not a man of all the company who heard without
feeling a strange sensation. To think of a ship as immense as the
_Titanic_, new and bright, sinking in endless fathoms of water. And
the two thousand passengers routed like rats from their berths only to
float helplessly in miles of water, praying and crying!

I went to my berth thinking of the pains and terrors of those doomed
two thousand, a great rage in my heart against the fortuity of
life--the dullness or greed of man that prevents him from coping with
it. For an hour or more I listened to the vibration of the ship that
trembled at times like a spent animal as a great wave struck at it with
smashing force.

It was a trying night.

I found by careful observation of those with me that I was not the
only one subject to disquieting thoughts. Mr. W., a Chicago beef man,
pleased me most, for he was so frank in admitting his inmost emotions.
He was a vigorous young buck, frank and straightforward. He came down
to breakfast the next morning looking a little dull. The sun was out
and it was a fine day. “You know,” he confided genially, “I dreamed of
them poor devils all night. Say--out in the cold there! And then those
big waves kept hitting the ship and waking me up. Did you hear that
smash in the night? I thought we had struck something. I got up once
and looked out but that didn’t cheer me any. I could only see the top
of a roller now and then going by.”

Another evening, sitting in the deepest recesses of the card room he
explained that he believed in good and bad spirits and the good spirits
could help you “if they wanted to.”

Monsieur G., a Belgian, doing business in New York, was nervous in a
subdued, quiet way. He never ceased commenting on the wretchedness of
the catastrophe, nor did he fail daily to consult the chart of miles
made and course traveled. He predicted that we would turn south before
we neared the Grand Banks because he did not believe the captain would
“take a chance.” I am sure he told his wife and that she told every
other woman, for the next day one of them confided to me that she knew,
and that she had been “stiff with fear” all the night before.

An Englishman, who was with us making for Calgary gave no sign, one way
or the other. The German who first brought us the news was like a man
with a mania; he talked of it all the time. An American judge on board
talked solemnly with all who would listen--a hard crab of a man, whose
emotions found their vent in the business of extracting information.
The women talked to each other but pretended not to know.

It took three days of more or less pleasant sailing to relax the
tension which pervaded the whole vessel. The captain did not appear
again at table for four days. On Wednesday, following the Monday of the
wreck, there was a fire drill--that ominous clanging of the fire-bell
on the forward deck which brought many troubled spectators out of their
staterooms and developed the fact that every piece of hose employed was
rotten; for every piece put under pressure burst--a cheering exhibition!

But as the days passed we began to take heart again. The philosophers
of the company were unanimously agreed that as the _Titanic_ had
suffered this great disaster through carelessness on the part of her
officers, no doubt our own chances of safely reaching shore were
thereby enhanced. We fell to gambling again, to flirting, to playing
shuffle-board. By Saturday, when we were passing in the vicinity of
where the _Titanic_ went down, only much farther to the south, our
fears had been practically dispelled.

It was not until we reached Sandy Hook the following Tuesday--a
hard, bright, clear, blowy day, that we really got the full story.
The customary pilot was taken on there, out of a thrashing sea, his
overcoat pockets bulging with papers, all flaring with headlines
describing the disaster. We crowded into the smoking-room for the last
time and devoured the news. Some broke down and cried. Others clenched
their fists and swore over the vivid and painful pen pictures by eye
witnesses and survivors. For a while we all forgot we were nearly
home. We came finally to quarantine. And I was amused to see how in
these last hours the rather vigorous ardors of ship-friendship that
had been engendered by the days spent together began to cool--how
all those on board began to think of themselves no longer as members
of a coördinated ship company bound together for weal or woe on the
bosom of the great deep, but rather as individuals of widely separated
communities and interests to which they were now returning and which
of necessity would sever their relationship perpetually. I saw, for
instance, the American judge who had unbent sufficiently after we
had been three days out to play cards with so humble a person as the
commission merchant, and others, begin to congeal again into his native
judicial dignity. Several of the young women who had been generally
friendly now became quite remote--other worlds were calling them.

And all of this goodly company were so concerned now as to whether
they could make a very conservative estimate of the things they
were bringing into America and yet not be disturbed by the customs
inspectors, that they were a little amusing. What is honesty, anyhow?
Foreign purchases to the value of one hundred dollars were allowed;
yet I venture to say that of all this charming company, most of whom
prided themselves on some form of virtue, few made a strictly honest
declaration. They were all as honest as they had to be--as dishonest as
they dared be--no more. Poor pretending humanity! We all lie so. We all
believe such untrue things about ourselves and about others. Life is
literally compact of make-believe, illusion, temperamental bias, false
witness, affinity. The so-called standards of right, truth, justice,
law, are no more than the wire netting of a sieve through which the
water of life rushes almost uninterrupted. It seems to be regulated,
but is it? Look close. See for yourself. Christ said, “Eyes and they
see not; ears and they hear not.” Is this not literally true? Begin
with number one. How about _you_ and the so-called universal standards?

It had been so cold and raw down the bay that I could scarcely believe,
as we neared Manhattan Island that it was going to be so warm and
springlike on land as it proved. When we first sighted Long Island and
later Long Beach it was over a thrashing sea; the heads of the waves
were being cut off by the wind and sent flying into white spindrift or
parti-colored rainbows. Even above Sandy Hook the wind made rainbows
out of wave-tops and the bay had a tumbled surface. It was good to
see again the stately towers of the lower city as we drew near--that
mountain of steel and stone cut with its narrow canyons. They were just
finishing the upper framework of the Woolworth Building--that first
cathedral of the American religion of business--and now it reared its
stately head high above everything else.

There was a great company at the dockside to receive us. Owing to
the sinking of the _Titanic_ relatives were especially anxious and
all incoming ships were greeted with enlarged companies of grateful
friends. There were reporters on hand to ask questions as to the
voyage--had we encountered any bodies, had we struck any ice?

When I finally stepped on the dock, gathered up my baggage, called a
few final farewells and took a taxi to upper Broadway, I really felt
that I was once more at home. New York was so suggestively rich to
me, this spring evening. It was so refreshing to look out and see
the commonplace life of Eighth Avenue, up which I sped, and the long
cross streets and later upper Broadway with its rush of cars, taxis,
pedestrians. On Eighth Avenue negroes were idling at curbs and corners,
the Eighth Avenue type of shopkeeper lolling in his doorway, boys and
girls, men and women of a none-too-comforting type, making the best
of a humdrum and shabby existence. In one’s own land, born and raised
among the conditions you are observing, responsive to the subtlest
modifications of speech, gesture, expression, life takes on a fresh and
intimate aspect which only your own land can give after a trip abroad.
I never quite realized until later this same evening, strolling out
along Broadway to pay a call, how much one really loses abroad for want
of blood affinity and years and years of residence. All the finer
details, such as through the magnifying glass of familiarity one gains
at home, one loses abroad. Only the main outlines--the very roughest
details--stand revealed as in a distant view of mountains. That is why
generalizations, on so short an acquaintance as a traveler must have,
are so dangerous. Here, each sight and sound was significant.

“And he says to me,” said one little girl, strolling with her
picturesque companion on upper Broadway, “if you don’t do that, I’m
through.”

“And what did you say?”

“Good _night_!!!”

I was sure, then, that I was really home!

[Illustration]




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

Punctuation, hyphenation, and spelling were made consistent when a
predominant preference was found in the original book; otherwise they
were not changed.

Simple typographical errors were corrected; unpaired quotation
marks were remedied when the change was obvious, and otherwise left
unpaired.

Illustrations in this eBook have been positioned between paragraphs
and outside quotations. In versions of this eBook that support
hyperlinks, the page references in the List of Illustrations lead to
the corresponding illustrations.

Redundant book title removed on page before page 3.

Page 8: “of a talented and beautiful women” was printed that way.

Page 176: “workaday” was misprinted as “wordaday”.

Page 496: “wordly” was printed that way.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TRAVELER AT FORTY***


******* This file should be named 65765-0.txt or 65765-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/5/7/6/65765


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



asdasdasd
